The way the world is progressing it seems that years around 2050 will be a much better time to live around the globe. The world is virtually a global village now. Anything happening anywhere can be instantaneously transmitted to the rest of the world by communication technology. For instance, see how Facebook is bringing rapid changes in consciousness of young generations around the world. Political upheaval in Middle Eastern countries by Facebook population forced rapid changes to take place. The sociopolitical situations in every country around the globe are changing fast meeting the needs of the day. The Supreme court made Gay-marriage constitutional in America, in the South, old flag signifying segregation came down, universal healthcare became solidified   The old concept and dogmas are being replaced by new bold ones in every field like religion, politics and science. Yoga and meditation has become a powerful aid in the hands of US Health care system. People are more knowledgeable about the holistic foods and Ayurveda paradigm. Over 30 million Americans are now practicing yoga and meditation for health and happiness.  So, I am very hopeful about the years around 2050.
If you read this poem of mine fifty years from now
Wondering if this will be helping “you”
To assess the ongoing fluxes rebuilding our humanity
Now undergoing tremendous changes
With waves of upswings in scientific-consciousness
Spreading across our global village
Starting only a few decades ago
Holistic Science of consciousness began its journey
Spreading in a geometric progression
And now becoming visible like a bonfire across!
Breaking all kinds of human barriers
Regardless of color, creed, age, sex, rich or poor
This Global village is a fluxing mass-of-consciousness
With small conservative-pockets battling such changes
Hence looming ahead the major duet-battles
To restore global harmony in few more years
Though not by any traditional battle that we are familiar
But ideological one among the same religious faiths
The Latest 17-year old activist against Islamic radicals
Youngest Nobel Laureate from Pakistan’s Malala Yousafza:
Is a walking embodiment of love and compassion!
She speaks movingly on behalf of the silent majority!
Against worldwide Islamic radicalism
Oppressing women’s education thru handful terrorists
Thus Malala created worldwide solidarity against terrorism
Modern Malala is like ancient Droupodi of Mahabharata
Who protested against the radicalism of Kourava
The perpetrators of immorality ruling the kingdom then
Creating a commotion leading to the war of Kurukhetra
Known as the War for the Preservation of Dharma
Directed by Lord Krishna, the prophet of Sanatana Dharma
Trusted to reinstate the Eternal Dharma on earth!
Soon religious radicalism will be uprooted by modern way
Bringing a stable harmony on planet earth, and
The current post-9/11 generation of enlightened-children
Born with open heart in growing global vision
Will propagate same ideal to the future generation citizen
So our global village will stay healthy for “you”
To live harmoniously Fifty years from now!
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -