I AM! or AM I AIM in perennial blame game?  State_mental line, desperate to pace light, existence seemingly dependent upon its seed's speed, soars, arching, starching star I Ching through marching universe, trying to reach, underscore, and underline itself although temporal continuum discrepancies perpetually portray parallelax perceptions. Eye longs to [l]ink pages of Present, Past and Future songs so insight's door stays a_jar. Sustained content seems elusive, out of context to most beholders, too narrow or too wide to effervescent mortals ephemerally flickering through life, stretching points till, reductio ad adsurdam full stop tries to make ends meet.
Unprepossessing, pensive, positive positron posting posthaste primes self-expression's impressions, seeks beyond existential sessions to process process within reason through temporal processions outside pseudo karmic intercessions.  Insight transcends online and offline dotted lines, on course for resourceful concordance recourse dancing out of and through chromatic pixel constellations. Name flames, but fame's claims and aims fail at phoenix revival as survival's dreams teem, gleaming haphazardly across mortality, then sure of no surcease, 'cease upon the midnight with no pain'.
If mind may be universe to itself, may universe be mind to itself?  If so, can it mind if minds can't encapsulate self-sufficiency before fresh fusion transforms confusion into cohesive constellations of potential energy particles? Prominence accorded one second thought fades the next. Today's priorities, yesterday's prior I tease, and tomorrow’s pry I or It ease being part and parcel of evanescence, stand on no ceremony, rotate on their axes as if ALL IS WAS and remains through ALL kid ego id skid, lightly mock gravity.  Aims appear temporary temporal equations, abberations in fragile equipoise, soon eclipsed.  Self-perception's femtosecond sound and fury symphonies signify nothing, howbeit fall into and spiral out from themselves in cannibalistic explosions of causal ripple rhymes.
Warp and weft, dance double helix under understanding's sum sun, weave cobweb strands standing both apart from and part of hole leading whole into and out of itself. Self-reference reflects on awareness. Competing harmony and chaos self complete, returning an ephemeral parody of own sown home grown in_quest to city zen. Pensive poet finds, refines, redefines and perpetually realigns suspensive Way, that, in turn, underlines individual inability to assign paradoxical convergent...seas to seize the day.