In the deep meditative (transcendental)   state a physicist in the quest of reality can reach the state of pure consciousness in total mind-body unity when his acute feeling help to reconstruct the reality by combining science with spirituality. Based on such meditative observations the famous armchair physicist, Albert Einstein, declared the state of reality as follows. “The universe is pure geometry, and pure geometry is pure mathematics, and pure mathematics is pure thought. Therefore the universe is a giant thought, and we are created in God’s image because we think.”
In everyday life we construct our own reality based on the power of individual observations. Enhancing the power of such observation material science helps us to see the subtler (relative)   realities constituting the gross objects around us. However, spirituality takes us further to another dimension, the level of pure consciousness (ultimate basis) : the basic power producing and sustaining (balancing creation and destruction)   our visible universe. This aspect is beautifully illustrated by 19th Century prophet, Sri Ramakrishna, in Calcutta, India before a group of disciples and recorded on the spot and published by another famous disciple commemorating Sri Ramakrishna, described as follows
(Taken from a fable of Sri Ramakrishna)
'Let me explain the nature of reality', said Sri Ramakrishna
The 19th century spiritual giant from India
Who often compared the human body with earthen pitcher
Declaring that mind-body pair acts as mirror for us
In order to realize the things in Nature
Then stated 'Suppose there are nine earthen pitchers,
Teeming with water and are reflecting the Sun'
Then asked, 'Tell me how many Suns will be visible there?
'A total of ten sir, nine images and the true sun'
Was the disciple's prompt answer
Master 'One pitcher is broken, how many remain now? '
Disciple 'Nine, eight images and one real sun, sir'
Master 'Another is broken, how many would remain? '
Disciple 'Nine sir, eight images and one real sun'
Six more pitchers were subsequently broken, and
The disciple had correct answer each time,
Then came the moment of truth to the last pitcher
When Sri Ramakrishna asked
'Break that one too and tell me the number again'
'Only one sir, the real sun', was confident answer
When the Master said with a smile
'No sir, reality of the sun itself is in question here:
Since no pitcher is left behind to report on the sun -
Who is to tell on sun's true nature without an observer? '
Thus with so much simplicity he explained the nature of reality
That no one will ever complain on its lack of lucidity
Thus, the nature of reality is phenomenal, and a personal one
Depends on subjective relation between an object and observer
As explained by Sri Ramakrishna in his story above
Using the sun's reflection on the mirrors as metaphor
Giving a clear message that
We, with varying experiences in life, create our own universe
And things are there as they are -
But we see them in the ways they are reflected in us
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
Decades later, the Nobel Laureate Physicist Neals Bohr came to the same conclusion in his work 'Objective Existence in Phenomenon Independent of Their Means of Observation', where like Sri Ramakrishna Bohr and Heisenberg (who introduced Quantum Mechanics)     maintained that observation alone constructs reality.