Will someone please say it’s a rumor and not true,
That professional woman’s golf is not going to,
Require that players who play in any LPGA events,
Have to speak English or back home they are sent.
Wow! Why not take the lead of the PGA men’s side?
When Tiger Woods emerged did others run and hide?
No! They practiced, worked out and hired coaches,
As brighter lights shined some women hid like roaches.
2009 from September 7, is just over 100 days away,
It takes years to learn English unless sports you play,
Basketball, football, baseball are a few that come to mind,
The Ladies Profession Golf Association is ahead, not behind.
Many ex-players are making the adjustment to play by play,
Far from the days when, “you know” was all they could say,
But, this progress has taken decades and now you expect,
Better golfers to learn proficient English just to get a check?
What’s happened to competition, head to head with the best?
Do we have to wait for another Olympics to put skill to the test?
I though only in politics via the cold war did this stuff exist,
Now the “sport” of women’s golf is going be added to the list.
Sports is an activity governed by a set of competitive rules,
Not to be goverend by where you did or did not go to school,
Going from one country to another you don’t need a visa to play,
Just a passport, there is no test as to what you can or cannot say.
True, not every country like our United States has free speech,
However, you need not be fluent in the local just to compete,
Playing against the world’s best is what makes golf so sweet,
Not sending them home because you’re tired of getting beat.
I know this is not all the players only a handful of spoiled quitters,
Sometimes is seems as though a few caddies are also baby sitters,
The one and only way to be the best is to beat the ones that are,
Who wants to watch a match with winners barely breaking par?
This a demeaning, stupid, selfish, insensitive, bitter, jealous rule,
You become a better golfer by going to UCLA instead of Q school?
I certainly hope this insensitiveness doesn’t too last long or go very far,
Will parking a Taurus next to a S600 Benz make the Ford a better car?
Didn’t the word golf mean, “Gentlemen Only Ladies Forbidden? ”
Now it’s the ladies who are trying to keep the best players hidden?
OK, hide your mama, jewelry, money, Picasso, Rembrandt or Monet,
But don’t hide the best foreign players by not allowing them to play.
There’s an Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, EEOC,
We should have one for the Equal Opportunity To Play, EOTP,
The 1st means you have rights if American Black or Latino Brown,
Number two won’t discriminate if you can’t tell a verb from a noun.
Most born and raised here do not know, just listen to their speech,
Many are insturctors in class rooms and they are the ones who teach,
There was a time when slaves were killed teaching each other to read,
This is simply the principle of, “good old fashioned American Greed.”
First there was the “noose” incident around the neck of Tiger Woods,
Now players are going to be penalized because they are too good,
Have you heard the one about fast foods? What do you think of that?
World carry out & delivery will be illegal so only Americans can get fat.
Many are reporting the decision was made and it's the sponsors call,
Still, it’s up to the American players, they’re the ones who hit the ball,
Whomever, to see that it is wrong you don’t need the neck of a Giraffe,
How many LPGA pros from this country spoke up on the others behalf?
Do what the men’s tour did, improve the quality of your game,
Does it bring any excitement with the boring same old same?
Ladies it’s time to speak up and proudly declare, “Yes we can! ”
Whether it’s Sweeden, South America, Korea, China or Japan.
Flash! Ladies Golf recinded, public opinion has changed its mind,
It only shows things don’t always improve or get better with time,
Neither the Asians or any other nationality is killing the LPGA tour,
Just incompetent front office decisions made behind a closed door.