Yes tell me it is not called the third world!
It is called the developing world? Developing?
Yes tell me it is not rich people exploiting the poor!
It is the system and multinational corporations?
People would never do such things deliberately!
News flash, some people not only would, they are?
To poor people struggling inside a third world.
Rich people can symbolize oppression slavery.
Rich people at best may be just rich boss pricks.
It does not amatta, what acolour, a skin is...
when it isa youa, who isa starving, toa slowa death!
When it isa youa, whoisa nota gota, fullie stomach!
It does not matter what colour a skin is...
When the people exploiting you are all the same.
When the people exploiting you are all rich pricks.
Of course children under five starving to death...
do so without ever experiencing the need to learn...
the meaning, of such words terms; their experiences differ...
Poor third world people, dying of starvation wages...
when lucky enough, to get any kind, of work at all.
Or being sweat shop worked, to a dropp dead early grave...
don’t usually much care, who is classified as super rich.
Or what prejudice exists, between the boss mega rich.
Arguments and equations
demanding colour equality.
Tend to lose ground and relevance
quickly, for the dying and the dead.
Questions of race harmony
can best be resolved.
When the entire race of humanity
is fairly, clothed and fed.
For dedicated; chosen social reformers;
like Mahatma Gandhi and Doctor King.
True civilized; family brotherhood;
has evolved to protect the underdog.
Regardless of religion, race, colour;
or conceived social status or class.
To truly love and protect fellow human beings
is truly a wonderful beautiful thing.
True social reformers are not limited
or interested in more power to women,
gays, specific religious groups, ethnic
groups, or class stratum of society; if
this means greater power misdirected,
to exploit, any specific part, of now
always important, social stratification;
contemporary, gradually evolving, human
conditioning society. The elimination
of all exploitation and underclasses, is
also the final freedom curing, of power
crazed misguided souls, wasting human
unresourced potentiality. But to a few, a few
stinking, filthy rich, rich blobs, of supposed
humanity; it makes not an iota of difference,
when, their exploited, third world workers,
expire. After the grasped, exploitation of the bitter
husk, it matters not what becomes, of withering dust.
To be further downtrodden, no more; to hunger or
starve, no more; to be free at last, to be free at last.
To de Mr Big Rich Boss Man, all used up, time to get a new one!
After all dem gutters are full, plenty more, where dat came from!
It was Jesus who said, a rich man is a man,
who has enough food for each day,
and if you have two garments, give one to
your brother who lacking has none!
Copyright © Terence George Craddock
Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi (1869-1948)   was known as Mahatma, or ‘Great Soul’.  He was a fearless champion of the weak and oppressed and said of himself, “The only virtue I claim is truth and non-violence.”
Martin Luther King, Jr., (1926-1968) . A black clergyman and inspiring speaker influenced by the non-violence policy of Gandhi, who became a leader of the struggle for racial equality and civil rights in the United States from 1956 onwards.