Are there currently trials and tribulations in your life?
Where as you’re going through a real hard time right?
You’ve prayed and asked in the name of Jesus Christ,
Chaos is still there smack dab in the middle of the fight.
Luke 22: 42, use the word of Christ Jesus, “Nevertheless, ”
1st Peter 4: 12, in place of bewilderment at your fiery test,
Separate yourself from doubt and weakness of the rest,
Numbers 14: 24, the spirit of Caleb allowed him to possess.
It’s too cold today, I much rather stay where it’s warm inside,
Or maybe I’ll flee to another country for a few years and hide,
What army in the world would ever be able to succeed?
If soldiers only decided to serve when they felt the need.
Armies could never win without dedication and pride,
With a cloud blocking the sun they would run and hide,
Everyone who’s about to go into battle will honestly admit,
Being leery of the person behind them who's known to quit.
Sometimes you must bear Jesus’ suffering and pain,
We are disciplined for battle not in sunshine but rain.
God’s boot camp is purposely held deep in the valley,
Every war is most deadly in the darkness of the ally.
Training is exceedingly, abundantly, above and beyond the norm,
Not wearing warm-ups, sneakers or cosmetics, they wear uniforms,
Neither will these recruits whine, frown, get angry, cry or complain,
That’s left to civilians where soldiers can do all things in Jesus name.
Being a ruler in heaven by all will not be realized,
As with the animal kingdom only the strong survive,
We have to trust that God knows the reasons why,
Everyone isn’t capable of being in charge of other lives.
Leaders in eternity will not be by lottery or random pick,
In order to test your quality God might intentionally afflict,
Even redirect your finances causing the outlook to look bleak,
I Thes.5: 18 always give thanks no matter how strong or weak.
For attacks against our youth, training can be found where?
The motto of the Boy Scouts of America is, “Be Prepared, ”
Train to be meticulous, proficient through repetition be bold,
Suit of armor, powerful, mighty, pulling down of strongholds.
Being a general in the army which one would you prefer to command?
Your soldier, “I don’t know if I can make it” or, “most assuredly I can, ”
Is the private in basic training who shows initiative the 1st to promote?
Or the out of shape sluggard always with an excuse, cracking jokes?
“I will never fail you or forsake you” Joshua 1: 5 proclaims,
It’s the ultimate test of your faith, relying on His Holy name,
No matter how tumultuous the rain that is pounding your life,
Only the elite are chosen, “A Soldier In The Army Of Christ! ”