Ba(ar) ck in Hamtramck, which a city surrounded by Detroit,
(Detroit was the place the Nation of Islam was formed) ,
I was perusing my sister’s books;
Pat was an avid reader,
She was a different reader,
The Harrad Experiment,
Fahrenheit 451,
The Autobiography of Malcolm X,
She fell for Father Cunnigham from Focus: Hope,
-but now she is dead
And some of the social issues from her library had come to light,
it lookslike had given me some insight
Malcolm X found God or Allah in prison,
-like most people, they did a sin retraction
Do they have time to reflect and think?
Malcolm X had found peace and solace;
With the study of the Koran,
And following the instruction,
Of the Prophet Elijah Muhammed,
he and Mohammed were the same
By the way,
-a street that borders the Focus: Hope annex bears the prophets name.
Malcolm X did support the idea that blacks should look out for own,
To rid the neighborhoods of crime,
prostitution and drugs,
That were responsible for wrecking their lives and homes.
All a valiant effort, until a group of black hit men from the Nation of Islam, “thugs”,
Cut him down, at the Audobon  Ballroom,
uptown in Harlem.
After he came back from his Hajj,
Malcolm X, who groomed for seizing control,
Of the Black Muslims, or the Nation of Islam,
felt that this was not for him,
Malcolm X, in Mecca, prayed with Muslims,
-white, yellow, race didn’t matter though,
After returning to America he decided to break away the Nation of Islam.
Soon afterward he met his demise.
For those that were with him, there was no surprise.
The FBI, under J Edgar Hoover,
(at time he was picking his lingerie out,)  did not act,
The FBI must’ve said “One gone and many more to go”.
The assassination was viewed at some kind hit by the FBI at that time,
Quite the contraire, Prophet Elijah Muhammed put the hit on him,
The Calypso Singer, Prophet Louis Farakhan knows,
-he was one of the runner-ups.
Prophet Farakhan has different ideas,
The Mother Ship, Jews are pigs, etc.
(In fact to Mother Ship is remembered in song by the Parliament Funkdelic,)
One being which white people is an experiment gone awry,
Farakhan had been spoofed on In Living Color, by the Wayans, in skit,
The Wrath of Farakhan,
Which was a parody of the movie?
Star Trek: The Wrath of Khan.
I used to see the Nation of Islam followers giving their vitriolic venomous view.
and The Final Call news,
- on 7 mile at Greenfield in Detroit, the northwest section.
I had a guitar student there, Henry Birch, - I would stop at a light,
They sometimes approached my car with a bag of fruit and their paper,
On the Final Call, I would challenge their views.
Because I asked a Muslim from Ghana,
a Muslim from Pakistan,
And a Muslim from the United Arab Emirates,
About Black Muslims, they said, independently,
- at different locations and times,
There are no such separations in regard to race with Islam;
that is blasphemy.
But the Nation of Islam became very powerful set up in the inner city,
Allegedly Chauncey Bailey paid with his life,
For attempting to do an expose on Your Black Muslims Bakery,
-in Oakland, California.
That why the Prophet Farakhan chose to endorse Barack Obama,
I feel that “Calypso Louie” hopes to legitimize the Black Muslim Movement
And the Nation of Islam.
From the shores of Maine to Alaska, from Montana to Alabama.
But what if McCain had been endorsed by the Klu Klux Klan,
Then that would raise an eyebrow or two,
I bet the KKK is secretly supporting the McCain campaign,
But unlike Farakhan they are not that stupid, they are not fools.
Because Farakhan did not help Barack’s campaign in fact hurt it,
Farakhan is too stupid to understand at least half of Americans are white,
At least half them are practicing Christians or Jews,
Far from practicing in the Nation of Islam.
What was Farakhan is thinking?
To have a semi-afro-American, or semi-black, mulatto or whatever,
Being in line for the prestigious elected post in the free world and possibly screw it up,
Man that is arrogance.
Barack did distance himself from endorsement,
But careful not to offend Farakhan,
Barack Obama is a politician after all,
He was raised Muslim but now he Christian, but in a way still attends a church with Christian separatists (?) ,
a spiritual oxymoron;
Just as moronic Black Muslims,
they’re different from Arab, Ghana, and Pakistani Muslims, right?
Black Catholics are different from Polish, Latino, and Asian Catholics.
Not So!
QUIZZICAL, YOU SAY?  What is this the answer to this political and spiritual cauldron?
But Obama will not tell people to not endorse him;
-that’s the endorser’s call.
(2-29-2008)