Recently discovered an official White House report on the events that took place on
December 15,2009 Titled (Yellow brick road))        posted by Wikileaks.
The report exposed that there had been an accidental releasing of an experiment virus at a Class 5 military research lab located in Oz Kansas.
The (Anti-M)  rouge virus upon inhalation temporally caused color blindness, and altered depth perception.  The White House declared a state of emergency for the entire State of Kansas ordering the closing of all public and private schools.
The National Guard had been activated, and President Barack Obama said 'It was for traffic control purposes.'
The following day Avatar premiered at theaters and received rave reviews all across the country, but not in Oz, where movie goers were walking out in droves, demanding refunds. One patron a member of the Lollypop Guild echoed the sentiments of the outraged crowd leaving the Toto Theater, he was quoted as saying. 'The greatest movie ever, when monkeys fly, it's the worst B movie I've ever seen.'
In light of the recently obtained Wikileaks information the producers of the movie, Avatar, have filed a class action law suit against the government in Federal Court
Pertaining to the large release of the color blind virus at Oz Kansas on Dec.15,09
Sighting that the movie maker's right to fool the public was infringed upon.
When asked about the movie, in a previously recorded interview, one of the producers gave this comment; 'We had the heart and courage to make it all along, even though it's really nothing more then a futuristic Cowboy, and Indian flick.  So, we spent a third world's yearly budget on special effects.  When you add that much glitz, and glam to a dog, and pony show people will be convinced it's a night at the opera.'
The United States Government settled out of court earlier today with the producers of the movie Avatar, for an undisclosed amount of money.  A highly informed source inside the bubble (AKA Glinda)      reported that the amount could be in excess of $500 million dollars.  Pending that there will be no further appeal(s)     following the Yellow brick road incident, the Brains behind Avatar will be clicking their heels happily ever after.
The Kansas City Cyclone
Article title: A Horse of a Different Color
Reported by D. Gale