From the looks of it, they were all doubting what I could clearly do like a pro.
'You can't do it.' Dave taunted. He knew me well, better than I wanted him to, but he knew me well. I came from a line of women who never backed down from a challenge, and this one was no different or difficult.
' what do I get if I do? ' I asked.
' I give you my snacks for the rest of the week.' He said.
I thought about this, knowing that his mom, owner of a small diner up the street made the best pastries. I smiled, licked the palm of my hand and reached for his. He shook my hand and my eyes danced in delight.
Pastries here I come!
I ran getting closer and closer to my challenge. A challenge that had been in that very spot for the eight years I had been alive, next to the once goat pen and now chicken coop.
With a jerk to the left, I snapped the fence open and began my climb.
I could already smell the ripe mango that he had been drooling over for days as I climbed higher and higher up the tree that I grew up on.
Sounds of my name repeated in chants from the other kids could be heard lost somewhere in the background, as I focused on getting to the top of the tree.
I was going to get that mango, and I was going to get that week of pastries.
The sounds of our black gates unlatching, startled me an stopped me in my tracks.
' please don't let it be my grand mother! ' I whispered repeatedly, only to be answered by the soft purring of her Pigeout she drove.
I think I turned every color known to man as I scattered to grab the mango and get down from the tree.
' Tasha! ' She called for me, then continuing to speak in our mother tongue. ' I have someone here for you.'
I stopped my rush and peaked from the leaves.
Mouth agape I squealed in excitement as I looked at who she was talking about.
Quick reminder, ALWAYS HANG ON TO A STURDY BRANCH WHEN YOU CLIMB ON TREES.
In a matter of seconds, I had a mouth full of dry leaves suffocating my scream of both severe pain but of excitement. My knee as I would later come to find out, was cut and scratched so badly. Tears filled my eyes and I got up limping to get to the mystery guest.
Mom.
She wrapped me in the tightest embrace anyone ever could give covering my face with kisses.
Neither of us could say much, being overcome by uncontrollable sobs from being 3 and a half years apart.