Butterflies, Complete panic,
A thrill of excitement.
Watching the water, pure and clear,
A feeling of wanting, drilling through my mind.
The race is called, my first event,
I feel a shudder run up my spine.
Standing in a line with my competitors,
My new enemies.
I observe them,
Watch as they prepare themselves.
Standing on the blocks,
The eerie silence of the start.
I single beep and I'm flying,
Straight though the air,
And then splash, I'm in the water.
The smooth cool water is calming,
But now is not the time to be clam.
The chlorine sings my skin.
I break the surface,
Hear my friends cheering.
I put my head down and stroke,
Only four more laps.
The sound of water drills in my brain,
I turn my head to breathe, and see my competitor.
I gain speed slightly, adding to the tension.
I reach the wall and do my fastest turn,
I will not let her overtake me.
When I breathe I look up to see my team,
To see them screaming and cheering.
Their support makes me put in a little more effort.
Then it starts, that nagging in my lungs,
My legs start tiering.
I push harder, striving for the finish,
Sensing the fear of the girl in the lane next to me,
I gain speed. I relish the competition.
Ten meters, only 10 more,
I start thinking of the finish.
It only makes me want it more.
I slide into the wall and finish,
I watch as the timekeepers discuss my time.
As they tell me my time I feel a rush of pride,
A personal best.
I close my eyes and listen for the results.
They call them, from 3rd place to first,
Second. A rush of excitement and regret fills my body.
But who beat me?
I look around, spotting out the winner.
She looks so happy,
In my mind I think she won't be as glad next time.
I slip out of the pool in one smooth movement,
Walk back to my team with pride.
Receive the sarcastic comments from my friends,
And the constructive critocism my coach.
The as the adrenalin of the race dies down,
I hear my name being called for another race.