Evil, I am calling!
Evil, do you hear?
Evil, I’m imploring!
Please – I beg your ear!
Evil, I beseech you Sir!
Evil, be you near?
Evil, might you spare some time?
Please – you must appear!
Deep in barren ground I feel a rumble and a quake:
Evil stirs beneath me now – oh how the earth doth shake!
Dark begins retreating back and gives to eerie glow:
Light of hues appeal to mind in glory of His show!
I, so truly worthy, view Evil’s phosphorescence!
I, so truly honoured,  scent Evil’s rancid essence!
Whenceforth He rose – ‘twas Evil’s phantasm!
Climax unfolds in Evil’s orgasm!
He lowered His sight to peer my form
From orbits sunk in fiery storm.
Incredulous now, and twice in awe, I
Harkened close to Evil’s roar:
‘I Evil, appear at your request!
Pray tell, of what is thine behest!
Your say must be bold, for you do not run, and
You’re evil enough – is my work not done?
So speak of your wanting, my impious serf,
To hail my cathedral so deep in this earth. ’
I pulled up with pride and pushed out my chest:
‘Though I be Man in all his great fame,
My evil is lacking – my damage is lame –
I crave for the power that you can instill, to
Heighten my evil and drive up the thrill! '
Evil stared in disbelief:
Could I see a trace of grief?
‘I, Evil, must say unto you:
I see wars of destruction – both savage and wild –
People lay dying – that’s woman and child!
All of mankind lay poisoned and green
From virus of hatred – oh this I have seen!
You fight and you kill and maim animals and all:
Much blood do you spill while you torture and maul.
You build up a town to destroy with your bombs then
Stab with your knives as you ravage your tombs!
You’re evil bar none, you ignorant fool:
I’ve no more to give – you already rule!
Evil am I - but only in noun:
You are the Lord that stands in your gown of
Evil and death – and terminal breath!
A figure is all that I am unto you –
A mirror to show and reflect
The evil in actions of all that you do:
Appeasement and love?  You reject! '
I stood there in silence to ponder his words -
And remained deep in thought ever since.
Copyright © Mark R Slaughter 2009
< br>
< br>
evil evil evil evil evil evil evil evil evil evil
evil evil evil evil evil evil evil evil evil evil
evil evil evil evil evil evil evil evil evil evil
evil evil evil evil evil evil evil evil evil evil
evil evil evil evil evil evil evil evil evil evil