He walks like a lover: mysterious and wise
chestnut hair hides two hazel eyes
leaving girls in his wake begging for more—
cause to him it's just the thrill of the lure.
He stares at you across the bar—
seductively undressing from afar;
you take the bait as he reels you in
thinking, 'I bet this guy always wins.'
something obscured in his character
I hypothesize an 'X' factor.
Pleasure floods your inner voice
that would-a otherwise made a sensible choice.
Your desire compounds his scheming loath—
there's a common thread that runs in you both.
You live for the craving of right now—
don't hesitate to seize or even ask how,
for it's over before it begins
and you're left alone with passion's sins.
What is it about him that excites to the core
while he's busy calculating his next score?
It's got to be hidden somewhere in the confide:
you've never been so satisfied.
It's not what he says but how he kisses down there—
how he stares and fights to care
that makes you believe you're one of the lucky ones
—or is it he's learned the innocent give better runs?
something obscured in his character
one guess it could be the Rock Star factor.
It wasn't even charm that made you falter—
I wouldn't be surprised if his words were chartered.
It was rather that he left all baggage at the claim
giving an illusion of a boy wildly untamed.
Where'd you get the notion: youth is invincible
defying your every previous principle?
It was his vulnerability—
it was too damn irresistable.
'Don't search too long or you'll end up alone'
is a piece of advice that should be ground like a stone
for aren't we all in this game of fishing
endlessly searching—for what we think is missing?
Heartbreak on the sleeve and confidence at the collar
is a recipe for the fiercest desire.
He keeps a record of his former ties—
truth in fact, he hates goodbyes.
At last I conclude indefinitely:
—whether or not it was worth it to me,
the something obscured in his character
is most certainly the Rock Star Factor.