Are you ok if tomarrow is the end? Would you be a hero for someone in need? Would you care, or stand and watch? If you knew you could make a difference, would you? If you were one vioce, and this was the last chance to be heard, would you take advantage of the moment and scream out your the word? Would you help someone who you dispised? Would you help someone when you have enough on your plate as it is? Would you help a homeless person find a home, and give them food? If you were with your friends and they were making fun of a person who would be considered a geek or nerd, which side would you be on? would you sacrafice your time to help another, no matter how late it is or who it is?   The world would be a better place it we just helped each other...I know that sounds impossible, but in reality...nothing is impossible if we just put our minds to it and stop being selfish. If we took the time to help someone, then they would probably take the time to help someone else and so on. But it takes more than one person to make a diffrence. It takes all of us. If we did this earlier we might not have had so many wars, therefore so many deaths. If we took the time to do something that really matters the world would be a safer and nicer place to live. I might only be sixteen but that doesn't mean I don't know anything. It doesn't take a rocket scientist to figure out that we have to care in order to make the world a better place.  here are some facts that will maybe encourage you to send this poem to others so that we can make a difference and save some lives......1.)  In a recent national survey of students in grades 6 to 10,13% reported bullying others,11% reported being the target of school bullies, and another 6% said they bullied others and were bullied themselves.    2.)  Teen bullying can lead teenagers tense, anxious, and afraid. Some teens feel compelled to take drastic measures, such as carrying weapons to school for protection or violent revenge. Others in desperation even consider suicide.     3.) By 2002,28% of the woman who had reported depression symptoms in 1995 said they'd experienced dating violence or injury from a partner, compared with only 18% of woman who didn't report depression.   4.)  1,439 teens will attempt sucicide in the next 24 hours.6 of them will end in death.   5.) Remember that any ongoing conflicts between a parent and child can fuel the fire for a teen who is feeling isolated, misunderstood, devalued, or suicidal. Get help to air family problems and resolve them in a construcive way.   6.) at last count, there were more than 24,500 different gangs around the country, and more than 772,500 teens and young adults were members of gangs. Some gang members are as young as 12, the average age is about 17 to 18 years old.   7.) Teens join gangs for a variety of reasons. Some are seeking excitment; others are looking for prestige, protection, a chance to make money, or a sense of belonging.---If we make a chioce to be the voice for those who won't speak up for themselves, how many lives would we save? If it was ur kid who got shot because of a disgruntal teen was being picked on and decided to bring a gun to shcool. so please spread the mesage to care and be a hero.