It was a very long journey
Long enough to make one sleep on the way
But as brave as I was, I didn’t have a nap
Guess why? I walked it till my legs ached to my laps
I became so tired and exhausted
Behold, the journey was not over yet
I decided to do otherwise
By crossing the road to the other side
Immediately, a car parked at my front
I didn’t hesitate, so I entered
I alone at the back seat and no one else
“Alas! A transformation has taken place”, I said to myself
In a commanding but polite way, I uttered
“Please, take me to so and so”
The driver ignited the engine in haste
And zoomed off with the speed of my taste
I noticed someone else in front
Definitely he wasn’t the driver
He was putting on a uniform
An army officer he is with a gun
Someone driving me?
With an army officer in front?
And I alone at the back seat?
I must be a very prominent personnel then!
As we drove by the road
Pedestrians waved their hands at me
But their faces were not familiar at all
It was the driver who then waved in return
I still felt like a super star going fot a show
Or rather, crème de la crème  of the society
This mustn’t be a dream, I prayed
But the journey was still not over yet
All of a sudden, the car halted
I was puzzled, for this wasn’t my destination
I said nothing so as to maintain decorum
Then, someone walked to the door and opened it
For me? I thought
My ego began to bloom
Immediately, he jumped in with others
I became perplexed with my mouth open
The seat became so tight, but the journey continued
Was I day-dreaming or what?
Attacked by mobs or a gang robbery?
With a security officer in the car?
No, they were minding their own business
Suddenly the car stopped for a second time
The driver turned to me and asked for my fare
I was still contemplating if or if not to pay
Till the officer gave me a scary look
I quickly complied, dipped my hand into my pocket and paid
Hurriedly, I jumped out
I peered at the top of the car
Lo and behold, it was a taxi
Indeed I was dreaming
A dream I longed for to come true
And the journey continued.