Father once again I come to you to ask yet for more blessings.  Oh Lord is there no end to what I ask for.  Each day new problems, new heartaches, more devistation, molestations, murders, drug use is increasing instead of decreasing.
Father God people are forgetting their purpose in life, they are lost.  Father many years ago, your son asked you to forgive them for they know not what they do.  Father when will they know what they're doing.
I have a difficult time Father looking at the news and reading of unnecessary killings, of a body found in close proximity, a body missing the head and very badly beaten.  Father God what kind of a person does this.  Satan is so busy and still finding a following.  I'm
concerned at the minds that he is still able to poison.
Today Father I pray that you take total charge and stop him in his tracks, that you cause these people to take a step back and think before they act.  That you cause these people who may be suffering from mental disorders, to seek help and allow the medical Doctor's to do what they are best trained for.
Father we need people that can show compassion, love and care to others and not to think of ways in which to harm them.
You my Father are so much more powerful than this evil being, please knock him out of the way and teach him a lesson.
I know you are listening Father and I know that you will take care of this evil when the time is right and only you Father know when that time is right.  I will never question why you do things the way you do.  I will hope that I will see positive changes in my time.
Father let me see people embracing and caring for each other instead of beating and killing each other.
You are the most high, the most intelligent, the king of all kings and I will trust in you and follow you all the days of my life.  Father God I truly have faith and will continue to follow you and love you.  I question you not.  Father I ask this in the name of yoru precious son 'Jesus'
Written:  Feb 24,2008.