It's the kiss of death, no tongue
she took my breath away, like collapsed lungs
She was Bonnie, I was Clyde, I took it all in stride
and went along for the ride
she's a ride or die, so no seat belts
we did want we wanted or what the heart felt…
was wrong, it's the same song playing over again on repeat
We were a power couple no others could compete
She's too busy for friends and I'm all the family needs
chasing the chasing the paper down, while running the streets
I loved her to death, but she is the darkness in my soul
I was getting reckless at the wheel, and my life out of control
But, I could never let her go, because she was all that had left
so I took an exit off the highway, stage left
people would talk to me about her, but it was talking to the deaf
because I was intoxicated with her, down to my last breath
her love was my drug and so I was her addict
the whole world was a blur, so it was time to panic
back on the highway, but she's in the driver's seat
she didn't even have a permit, but I couldn't see the street
head spinning like ring-around-the-rosy to a beat
Suddenly we saw red and blue lights in the rear-view
She was like 'we not going to jail, just be cool'
she pulled the ride, to the side, slowed down until she parked it
a man was approaching from behind, so she decided to spark it
she put her foot on the gas and mashed it,
the limiter went down fast as if she wanted to pass it
the road was really wet, but we took flight like a leer jet
on your mark... get set...
I felt like I wouldn't make it out alive
like playing Russian roulette with a loaded gun… suicide
I told her to stop but she said this our fate,
so then I mashed her foot down and then hit the emergency brake,
The car sorta swerved around, then stopped into place
I was sitting there feeling like cooked food on a hot plate
You only got one life to live and for me this is very scary
Surrounded on all sides, but we're not military
I can feel the heat as I approached the furnace
she's look at her heater thinking, 'I should burn this'
my life flashed before me in 3d
I wasn't ready to die, but I wanted her with me
She looked at me and said 'I'll see you in hell, baby'
I was like oh, hell no! ! !  no ifs, ands, or maybes
I'll meet you at heaven's gate, save you a seat at the table
She said but there's a spot in hell for us already and heaven can't be bought
she said that's not for people like us, cut from the same cloth
you think and I do... you are the paper, I'm the glue
we stick together, me and you
She said if you not coming with me by choice, then I'm taking you force
we deeper than any marriage, we won't end in divorce
she pointed the gun at my head and she then said
do remember last December you wrote me that letter
it was a love jones, it said that we'd be together forever,
for worse or for better, it's now or never…
you know how we ride, so now let's die together
Gun to my head, I guess it could be said, I'm sweating bullets
I'm looking at the trigger, wondering if she would pull it
I tried not to cry, as she said goodbye
remembering the 'good times' or bad times from the naked eye
I held my head up to the sky and said 'Oh my…
God forgive me', then I awoke