My mother cannot stand the sound of fingernails scratching on paper napkins.
And just like you can always count on the evening to scrape the mountaintops and bleed sunsets,
Whenever someone has an urge to trace their mind's ramblings on to a napkin with their finger,
Her eyes sharpen like a bee stinger,
Sending a wave of venom over the dinner,
Hoping the offender gets the picture.
I guess, for her, nails on napkins are nightmare symphonies,
But we all have our idiosyncrasies,
Don't we?
My father has kept his wallet in the same place probably since he made his first penny. At home—it's on his nightstand, on the go—it's in his right, back pocket.
I've come to rely on the rectangular patches of dust on his night stand surface and the rectangular signs of wear on the back, right pockets of his jeans like I rely on my good mornings and nights to be judged by the sun's waxing or the waning of light.
And it's that consistency, those honest, pure originalities that are what home is to me.
My little sister doesn't know that I still know who she is.
She's in high school now,
She listens to Joni Mitchell and texts boys silently in the backseat—
She's always got somewhere else to be—but to me she'll always be the girl who also doesn't know I know she snores in her sleep.
To some she's a picture on Facebook, but to me she's the girl who asked me, as tears fell, if I could save her from her closet and the monsters it held
So now when I think of home, I don't think of four walls, a roof and a driveway.
I think of napkins.
I think of rectangles.
I think of rescues
I think of the third time in a row I was told to take out the trash, and still didn't.
I think of my favorite coffee mug in the cupboard with the smooth handle and the deep center for maximum caffeine consumption.
I think of the old jazz CD my Mom plays on Sundays that is scratched from years of duty—and whose skips are now as much a part of the song as the singer.
I think of the acid I gave my sister when she told my Mom I was sent to the principal's office before I did.
And I think of the next day—how I curled my arms around her as she sat on my lap and we laughed about the things that don't matter and no one else understands.
I think about the patterns on the sweater my Mom wore when I cried in confusion about how friends could be so mean.
I think about the lemon tree in our front yard that has not grown more than three lemons since we planted it 5 years ago.
I think about Rubber Soul playing on a tape in my Dad's car on the way to the beach.
I think about how my Mom always bitches about that lemon tree in the front yard that doesn't grow lemons.
"Are you it's not just a bush we think is a lemon tree? " she says.
"It is! How would you explain the couple lemons we've seen in the past? " Dad says.
"The same way we explain UFOs, " she said.
When I think of home I think of that night after dinner we played Monopoly and it resulted in a discomfort of Cold War proportions.
I think about the week I was sick with the flu and the week immediately after that my Mother was sick—like she inhaled my sickness so I wouldn't have to.
I think of the day on the beach I looked behind me at my Mother, father sister sitting together in the sand and thinking, "I should be wearing sunscreen right now, shouldn't I? "
And now my journey home begins with a dial tone
And sometimes it becomes too much when I remember that the rosy-cheeked days of strolling through chilly October pumpkin patches on my father's shoulders are over.
I can't take those days with me. I can't take the games, the lemons, the hugs, the music—
So instead, I take my thoughts back
To the days of sun-stained grass, chocolate milk afternoons and floors made of stuffed animals.
The days of Power Rangers costumes in place of dresses and the drivers seat of a car looking like the American flag on the surface of the moon.
I place myself in the middle of a soccer game as clumps of kids run circles around the ball and I sit—on the field—picking daisies and thinking of the orange slices at halftime.
I put myself at the foot of my mother's bed shrouded in my best friend blanket because no nightmares can penetrate that much love.
And some nights, I can even put myself in my bed, shaking at midnight listening for the reindeer on the rooftop and believing in magic.