1.	How hard I cross my fingers when I'm headed home. Every time. It's like a bad habit, the hoping, the wishing. I need to stop wishing.
2.	That your hair is always messy. Don't worry, I like it that way. It makes you look like an electric shock, alive, chaotic. It spells out exactly how much of your life you've lived, not just existed.
3.	The awkward greetings I give you when we pass, trying to pierce through a perfect day, but they always fall flat or quiet.
4.	You mean all your compliments, but the most you do is mean them. They are not a gift to you, or reaching out in the dark. They are words.
5.	But you always know just what to say to me.
6.	I overthink your words.
7.	I overthink my words.
8.	I overthink everything.
9.	How you almost fall backwards out of chairs every time you laugh. Without fail. It's like you're falling for something other than me.
10.	When I walk into a room, I look for an empty seat next to you just so I can trick myself into thinking you're inching closer to me. It's always my chair moving.
11.	The way the minutes sprint by in the early morning, countless nights where at 4am you'll say you're not tired and an hour later I have to drag you out so you don't do anything you'll regret. You're falling asleep the whole time but they're still the best nights I've had in a while.
12.	Your favorite song. Correction: your favorite songs. Every time one of them comes on and I can feel your eyes light up before I even look at you, I add it to a list of things to listen to harder. I want to know them better than I know you.
13.	That no matter how far away you are I can still feel you moving like chains or a marionette string. Maybe you have dark magic. I don't really care. I love black holes.
14.	I need to end this list before I add you to it, because I don't know you by heart I don't know you by heart I want to know you by heart by hands by head by everything
15.	You, someday.
16.	How hard I cross my fingers when I'm headed to you. Every time. It's like a bad habit, the hoping, the wishing. I need to stop wishing.
17.	I will never stop wishing.