(THIS IS THE 2ND CONCLUSION, THE CHEATING VERSE...4M THE WAKE ME UP CALL POEM.....PLEASE READ THAT 1ST TO UNDERSTAND THIS...)
(she started off by letting him know about the missed call)
as her left the bathroom,
she left the water running
and as her heart was steadily drumming.....
in her ears.....and very soon she began to hear...
you trifling (bleep) , you did what? '
'im not leaving my wife for a 2 week fling...
no if ands or buts...
yea, i shouldnt, but im coming your way
and i will be back home saturday....
what you tell her...what did you say...
if you ruined me and her, i will make u pay
no, i never gave you permission to speak to her at all..
'well then, you read my text wrong, i said after my shower
in about an hour...
i'd give you a call.....
no, i said after this week....
i was gonna tell her and come clean
i dont want to be with you
i want to be with my queen
you are nobody to me
just a fling....
after this week, i will tell you goodbye..
'surely you dont have the audacity why?
cuz i can tell 4m the broke phone
plastered all over my wall
that you just might of broke up my happy home
cuz your jealous, making that stupid call'
that when it hit me, i finally had a plan.i was going to show him the side of me..
that revengeval scorned woman
he was going to regret it, just you see
want to know whats my plan then you best continue to read
'hey baby, come here a moment, i kinda need your help....'
i let out a yelp
he came in running..'what did you do? '
'what can i do? '
i inwardly smiled...throat full of bile
'well for starters' i said...'let me make love to you'
he stared at me in amazement.' i know that girl wasnt telling me the truth.'
he couldnt believe his ears
and my anger suddenly disappeared
'let me step out of the shower,
and you can towel me dry
and then we can see
if your so good you make me cry'
'remove the area rug, from in front of the bed....
i want to do it, on the hard floors instead
'i will be right back, theres a few things i need
'1 of them is sand, and the other is a mystery,
to fulfill my fantasy.....! '
he grabbed me by the arm
he face showing signs of alarm
'i have 1? 4 u, what happened to your cell? '
with a blank face i replied....i got a call, and then out of the blue
no 1 was there, i swear...
i just heard a couple of clicks,
and some lady called me a witch
and as i was taking off my dress, i suddenly slipped
and i was trying to stop the fall
my phone flung 4m my hand, and smacked against the wall'
i lokked at him so innocently, loving and adoring
meanwhile i was seething inside, knowing he had been whoring
he hesitated at 1st
but then he got that hungry thirst
'okay baby, my sexy lady'
'go get what you need, and j will be ready.'
for that fantasy
i inwardly scoffed'indeed'
she had suceeded, using his own vanity
i threw on a robe, still naked beneath
the then fabric...as thin as a sheet
i went outside, and grabbed a baggy full of sand
i laughed hysterically,4 what i had planned
i snuck into the garage, and grabbed the half gallon of gasoline
i was gonna scare him 2 death, in my fantasy
he would relive this night in all his years to come
never would he ever
repeat history, he'd repent all he'd done
to me..
and the....
once 'us' reality
it was gonna be
such sweet revenge 4 me
and i will make it that he'd never cheat
on any other woman that he'd get withoh after to night i'd be positive of it
revenge can be so sweet
especially to a woman scorned
by a cheating man, and hisdirty little whore
i poured the sand into 4 wine glasses
and poured the gasoline, into 4 pretty vases
put all 8 containers onto a tray
with broken branches
and covered em up, with some fresh picked daises
i went back into the room
where he was laying on the floor
an then an unwanted image came to me
of him on top of her
and before
i could change my mind about the fantasy
i thought to myself no1 would ever get this close to him again
once i tore apart
his black cold heart
so i might as well go thru with it....and when
he begged for mercy, if he
began to beg and plead....
here we go readers, were coming to an end
but its no way over for him....
'are you ready, i asked, not paying him any mind'
'this was my revenge
my justice, and justice is swift, deaf and blind
when you are insanely out your mind.....
all that mattered now
is how...
he would suffer so...
i wanted him to realize, that
infact
i did know
what he'd been doing....
all the cheating and screwing....
god only knows how many other women there had been
and as a now religious person, i found
that iwas now bound
to make him suffer so 4 all his sins
im not sadistic, nor am i in to the black arts
but now was a good enough
time as any, to try out that stuff
it was his end, and my new start
no, im not going to kill him, what fun would that be
no i wanted him to live, the rest of his life with these memories
so i grabbed the pair of my fluffy handcuffs
and placed one on his wrist,
instantly his hand balled up into a fist
'i cooed to him, baby is that loose enough
he turned his arm from right to left, and did a couple twists,
and as he checked out the cuffs, i kissed him on the lips
he wiggled himself into a comfortable position
i softly whispered in his ear ' now my sexy man youve got to listen'
i took the loose handcuff and placed it around the leg of the bed
straightened out his legs and torso
and placed his hands above his head
this felt so good...ever more so
that my plan has become a reality
and im finally getting revenge while playing out my fantasy
i smiled, and he chuckled
i got his belt, and playfully hit him with the buckle
he winced in pain
i moaned his name
and playfully i tapped him again
thats when
softly but seductively I
asked my? s, staring him eye to eye
youve never asked me over the years
what gives me pleasure, what do i fear
why? '
he stammered, 'i thought i fulfilled your every desire'
i thought i set your blood on fire'
i laughed, 'tonight...you are so right...
my blood is on fire...
but no its not 4m any sexual desire'
what a funny choice of words i thoght to myself
as i pictured him engulfed in the flames of eyernal hell
it was his turn
to be surrounded by fire
but he wouldnt burn
the flames were going to let him see
what he did to me...
by being a cheater, an obitual liar
gently i poured the sand around his large frame
next around his legs, head, and arms, i did the same....
the ending was come near
the end of my game
as i had feared, ive went insane
around the thick sand that surrounded his body
i placed some huge rocks, from the room, that i collected from a hobby
readers, in a few moments i will draw you a diagram
of what i am to do to this weak pathetic man
noone should ever do this in real
these are just words, from something i feel
this is not but a dream....
never to be played out....
its poetic justice.....thats all this is about
so now surrounding his body was about 4 inches of sand
high, as well as wide
then outside the sand, a total of 8 huge rocks outlined the man
i made a vee, of sand and rocks
all up his outspread legs, up to his crotch
around the rocks, i pored out the 2 last
glasses of sand
even tho i was hell bent on revenge, and pain
and thru this i was going to vent
and even though i felt insane
there were rules, not to be broken in this game
i would hurt him, nor cause him physical pain
you do not cross a line, n cuz anyone harm
if you feel that way, you belong at the funny farm...lol
so here lay this cheater, the WOMANIZER
about to poop hisself, when he thought he was about to be set on fire
i took the branches, and plac ed em on the 2nd row of sand
then i started slowly pouring a thin line of gasoline
he started to holler out my name
i whispered to him...'you dont have to be afraid...
i just want to teach you a lesson, so next time you behave
he started to sream..
as i poured out dropp by drop
the gasoline...
onto the old rotted branches, the sand was not oily but dry
this would contain the blaze....thats no lie
i took all the safety precautions, that i could take
there was no way i was ever gonna make a mistake
this was not real, it was fake
it was just my revenge, for my n his sake
he begged for me to stop
he cried and he screamed
it was almost done, for it was just a dream
nothing was as it seemed
it was to late
cuz i was filled with hate
and only his conscious would determine his fate....
i opened the dresser drawer
and struck
a single match
he now knew he was stuck
between me and and the firey batch
of my insane inferno
it burned around him slow
as the embers grew, and began to glow
like a candle in the dead of night
it was a beautiful sight
i dropped a 2nd match
onto a branch
and as each 1 dropped, it was like dominoes falling, each one catched
fire, a little at a time
til there was a blazing fire
lighting up his whole outlinr
panicked stricken he looked up at me
'this is not a fantasy, this infact is insanity...'
no i replied....
it is indeed my fantasy
with a twist of revenge
cuz you lied
when...
i didnt get to finish what i was about to say
'i dont want to play! ! ! ! '
crying, he stuttered are you going to just stand there and watch me burn? '
what can i say for u to stop this, whatever it is i learned...'
i threw back my head, and said
what did you learn....besides playing with fire will get you burned
you dont ev en know why i surrounded you by fire.....
you cheating liar....
next time dont cheat, ....do not screw
on the 1 your with, when your suppossed to be true....
or this just might happen again...my friend
dont break another heart, by being a womanizer
or youll get burned again
playing with that fire...'
speasking of which, the sand will keep you safe
just dont move an inch, or move anything out of its place
if a piece of wood happened to spark out of the fire
dont worry, you cheating liar..
the rocks will catch them sparks...and if they dont
this is a small blaze, its under control it wont
reach your body, nor your face
just as long as you stat in place...'
the sand that outlines you
will keep the fire inside the two
circles i made around you
that i made...so you best behave....
i got dressed and packed my things, i made sure to toss him the engagement ring
and as i was ready to leave
i poured water in a vase
and beside him i placed
it...with a towel, and a fire extinguisher
yeah i gave him an out, the womanizer
but i truth, i had placed em to far away...
i wanted him to stay, and pay...
in about an hour, the fire will begin to smolder
i said over my shoulder..
do not worry..
ive got to go, im in a hurry
you played me, i represent the fire
it often gets you burned...so for your sake i pray that youve learned
dont give in to your cheating desires
oh and your right about 1 thing i dont like confrontations
but as a woman, i will always be in control of my own situation
looks like the fires out, its just alot of smoke
i handed him the towel to breathe in so he didnt choke...
wait another 30 minutes, bcuz the rocks and floor will be hot
no plastic had melted
it was a clean fire, nothing had been welted
so goodbye...to a cheating ***
hope you have yourself a blast
now everytime you see or smell fire
you always remember this womans' desire
and now that ive imprinted onto your nightmares and dreams...
just remeber nothing is as it ever seems
ive given you something to fear and for every single tear
i was about to shed..
this revenge was fittingf for a love now dead...
cuz lil' ol' me....will always be there
lurking around somewhere
in your haunted memories...
you deserved it...was she worth it.? '
he woke up that more, to a faint smell of gas...
and beside him on the pillow was a bunch of ash....
me and my suff...were gone..i had, had enough...i was done...
told you nothing is as it seems....
in your nightmares, or haunted dreams