Greetings, my brethren,
May God bless you in His Holy Name.
I was once among you long ago.
Remember the gifts we shared?
Remember the stories we told each other,
Our encounters with the Lord?
Surely I remember those hours,
Time flickering by, like the flames of our fire.
How the years have melted away since then,
As each Winter yields to Spring...
I laugh at the smiles upon our faces,
I marvel at the answered prayers
And so many healings along our path.
How many sandals did we wear away?
Our journeys from town-to-town,
Singing newborn hymns fresh-written,
With psalms poured out like wine,
Anointing our hearts afresh...
I forget the words, yet not our joy,
Such was our heady portion in the Lord.
Were there not prophecies, too?
And revelations new every morning?
As if awoken from sleep, still grasped.
Such lessons to learn and such lovely words.
Disciples side-by-side, arm-in-arm, like cedar trees,
Interlocked, standing firm, upright in the noonday sun,
Smiles for everyone along the dusty roads...
Yes, I remember, with a glad heart within me,
We chosen few, adopted sons of the Most High,
Spirit-filled and Spirit-blessed...
Yet time took your souls, yes, one-by-one,
While I must kneel in prayer alone,
Youth departed, now as old as time,
No mountains dare this body climb...
I miss you all, my brethren,
Now absent from this Earthly life,
Your faith, your strength, your courage,
Your wondrous outstanding love...
I would join you yonder, where angels fly above,
Yet every day I ponder. Lord, is my faith enough?
And then Christ came, He spoke to me...
New prophecies revealed for future years,
Time and times again, unfolding scrolls,
Beneath the sun, the moon and stars,
Engulfed within their circuits, waiting...
Their canvas like a sparkling backdrop,
A spreading curtain framing all below.
Once written, I shall join you, brothers.
Receive me then, with that steadfast love,
That treasure trove, our treasure trove on Earth...
Denis Martindale, copyright, August 2012.
Dedicated to John, upon the Isle of Patmos.
We can hear the word of the Lord on
Revelation TV on UK Sky Digital 581
as well as the WATCH NOW link on
the revelationtv-dot-com website...