High above, sitting on his ledge, to himself he is to think.  I am neither nor am I heard.  I am as ghost.  I try and I try, oh how hard I do try, but I must, I mustn’t cry, but now instead his hazel eyes grow moist.  A heavy line and scarred face is stained by years.
Such a said faith for this one of light, personally known for the slayings of both the serpent and a dragon, should have never become one of the fallen.
Children need never suffer, but pain is so much a part of this child’s life.  Pain, his unwanted friend, in a sense his religion, and in death he hopes they will part.
A body that has long been broken, as he is to lay, his body he has now split open.  The blade is then tossed away as an unwanted token.  Blood flows now, as the darkest of wines from a child who did nothing but shine.
Sleep he must, ashes to ashes.  Drifting off he prays to his Gods and Angels to take him to a special time and place he once knew of long ago.  Dusk to dusk, in this sleep he must trust.
My a rose hear of his name, the fruit has fallen from the vine, for it has been said, that of which has been lost may never be saved!
Eyes closed, in his sleep, he is to speak a name, and that name is Payne.  True the shadow would, cut off the mist one has come.  The figure approaching is that of a female, a beautiful female in fact.  A sprit of an angel has arrived, the angel known as Payne, and she has come to get by her loved one’s side.  For here was a very special love between these two children.  Upon her passing from the physical to the next, from the next she had become his guardian angel.
Kneeling besides her special one, speaking softly.  No, no what have you done, not like this, not like this.  Then screaming out, calling to the Elder known as Further, Further why have you let this happen, why have you all let this happen why.  You will answer me Further, why let this happen.
Sands of time slips from hands of has one who sleeps.  Now she weeps her tears.  She sweeps away from her cheeks.
Payne, a voice from the shadows is to say.  It is not yet too late to save, Payne you can save your special one from the grave.
The love you feel for him all know, stop the blood flow, mend his wounded wings, tie with a bow, but then you must not go, this time yourself you must show, to him this time yourself you must show.
My child Payne, now you must please listen to me.  The children were never meant to suffer, but some do.  You know of this first hand as you yourself are one of the light.  The child besides you, this one of light was always meant to fight, this one, to the evil ones is to install fright, for the children of the light have always kept what is true and right.  So my angel Payne, mend his broken wings so again he may take flight.  I go now Payne.
Wait further wait she is to say, but nothing, not another word from Further is to be heard.
Payne is to hold the sleeping one gently in her delicate arms, spoken are words just so soft.
Love, it is I Payne, your wounds with a bow I did tie, please I beg of you, on me you mustn’t die.  Love of mine, you mustn’t go to the pine, instead brighter than the sun, moon and stars you may shine.
Never surrender, surrender not to the pretender.  Great bird of prey, my love falcon, your wings I did cure, together again we shall sore, falcon a fallen one you are no more.
I have a kiss for you, for my love has always been true.  Now my beauty you will take, my breath you take.  Falcon I need you to awake.  Falcon I beg of you awake, please awake!
In the shadows, elder Further is to quietly whisper to himself.  It is this one, who possess the light, this child in his darkest of hours will yield the most destructive of powers and this he does for all of ours!
By: Anthony Rubino