Time is on my side, yes, it is.
Time is on my side, yes, it is.
Now you were saying that you want to be free
but you'll come runnin' back, you'll come runnin' back,
you'll come runnin' back to me
The Rolling Stones
Does anybody really know what time it is
I don't
Does anybody really care
care
If so I can't imagine why
about time
We've all got time enough to die
Oh no, no
Chicago Transit Authority
If I could make days last forever
If words could make wishes come true
I'd save every day like a treasure and then
Again, I would spend them with you
Jim Croce
Like sands through the hourglass... so are the Days of Our Lives.
Dr. Thomas 'Tom' Horton Sr.
So what will become of the 4th dimension?
The Saudis have their intention to make time based on Mecca time that is certain.
True, the mathematics that we use in the west was from numbers that were taken from the Middle-East,
And the dominance of  'time' is more than a physicist's dream feast,
The battle is underway,
For centuries, an astronomy observatory in Greenwich, London - the namesake of Greenwich Mean Time - has been the reference point for lines of longitude, ships' navigation on the world's seas and the time zones used today.
Move over Big Ben, a clock atop a tall, tall, tall building located in Mecca will be beginning to chime.
But Saudi Arabia wants to change that. It's building what it calls the largest clock in the world, atop the second-largest skyscraper in the world, in the Islamic holy city of Mecca - in hopes of replacing GMT with 'Mecca Time.'
The Saudis intend to have Greenwich Mean Time changed to Mecca Mean Time.
So what will become of the atomic cesium clock?
What will become of the different time zones?
What day does daytime begin?
Does anybody care?
Einstein's Theory of Relativity comes into play here,
From my perspective.
Time is on no one side,
Time is from the time we are born to the time we die,
For those who believe infinity, infinity has no time,
No seconds, minutes, hours, day, weeks, months or years, decades, or millennium,
And may I spend eternity with my soul mate, my wife, Judy.
8-21-10
http: //www.aolnews.com/world/article/saudis-want-mecca -time-to-replace-gmt/19588949? icid=main|classic|dl8|link4|http%3A%2F%2Fwww.aoln ews.com%2Fworld%2Farticle%2Fsaudis-want-mecca-tim e-to-replace-gmt%2F19588949