SWAMI VIVEKANANDA (A brief introduction)
Swami Vivekananda (Narendranath Datta)    was born on 12-01-1863 at Kolkata and died on 04-07-1902 at 39 years of age.  He was a disciple of Guru Ramakrishna Paramahamsa, who worshiped Mother Kali. Swamiji was the first religious ambassador to America, in which land he was recognized for his talents and deep knowledge in the Hindu ancient scriptures and religion.  He was advocating for Universal Religion.  Every world citizen should read his speeches in 9 Volumes released by the Ramakrishna Mission Association..   His life story starts with the Birth of Hinduism.
THE BIRTH OF HINDUISM
When did Hinduism begin?
Still, the exact date is unknown.
It’s such an ancient religion,
Grown on a solid foundation.
It’s a religion of tolerance,
And with all its patience,
It respects other religions,
For their religious doctrines.
In Bhagavad-gita Krishna says
“There may be many ways,
But all the paths lead to me,
Whatever path it may be.”
Religion is the backbone
Of national life of Indian,
And was nurtured by Great Sages
From time immemorial, of all ages.
At every time of spiritual crisis,
In this Indian soil, there arose
An Ascetic, a Sage, or a Saint,
From the danger, to protect it.
Rama, Krishna, Buddha,
Adi Sankara, Nanak, Chaitanya,
Like this, came messengers, one by one,
All of them sent by the Heaven.
Names many, there may be,
But the Hindus ever see
God as one Supreme,
Not many, but as same.
A man is not only a father,
But also a son to his father,
A teacher, when he teaches,
A customer, when he buys.
He’s a seller, when he sells.
A preacher, when he tells.
When he sails, he’s a sailor.
When he stitches, he’s a tailor.
As a King, he’s a ruler,
As a mendicant, a beggar,
When he wins, a winner,
When he sins, a sinner.
This one man, who’s the same
Takes up many karmic names,
Thus, Gods many have come
But they’re one and the same.
Brahma is the creator,
Vishnu is the protector,
Siva is the destroyer,
*Karmic names, they bear.
(*Karmic = action)
Just like one Sun reflects,
And shines in all reflectors,
God is one, but projects,
All o’er, as various objects.
A compendium of Truths,
The Hinduism gave as Vedas,
Which lead one to the goal,
That is sacred and spiritual.
This is the salient truth
That exists from its birth,
Which had no beginning,
Nor will it have an ending.