How the time passes by.
We are unable to arrest it.
How quick the people are leaving this world.
We are unable to prolong our existence on this land.
We therefore should not take it away
As we are approaching to the end of the twentieth century.
Many nations of this world are racing to build their armaments.
Why are they doing it?
To destroy this land with the people living on it.
Can we be proud having an atom bomb.
Those who have it are announcing to the world their power.
Without thinking of a mistake and dimensions of destruction.
How funds are melting away to build them and be tested.
These funds can be used for the hungry masses,
To feel them and fertilize our land to make it richer.
A multitude of people would be satisfied
They would be happy and enormously grateful
Maybe that day will come.
That we will together save the nature and masses of people.
The bomb once thrown carries only death and destruction
Everything would be reduced to ashes.
All living things would die, even trees.
To the ones alive a bird would not sing
Because of the nuclear experiments people are becoming poorer
Lets give some thought how to conquer that evil.
Lets look differently on nature and perceive its beauty.
This world is indeed charming,
India is a mysterious and curious country.
Is the atom bomb for them a paradise?
Among the other countries it brought indignation,
Is it worth to change your own country into hate?
Atom bond will not solve problems and feed people
Why not anybody is thinking about it,
Lets use the atom for peaceful purposes
Lets leave the decisions to the highly developed countries,
How to save the land from being fed with poison,
How to fertilize, so that the masses will not be hungry,
Also war, but not nuclear,
Must be proclaimed to the element of nature.
Not necessarily atom weapons for destruction.
It is being done with perfectionism by cataclysm,
That is the real enemy of people.
We must learn hot to strive to subdue it,
Then we will not be the perpetrators
Of exterminating this beautiful globe,
As is our MOTHER EARTH.