Book One: The Journey Begins
(This is a fictional poetic series and short story about events that never take place and about people that have never existed. Any representation of an actual event or person is purely coincidental in nature.)
Mission One: Take no prisoners
I am picked for my very first covert mission.
I am young, anxious and ready for a good fight.
Because of the constant training, I am in top condition.
I am an U.S. Army Ranger trained to kill by the dark moonlight.
The first time I am called to the captain's tent.
He thoroughly detailed the assignments I must do.
The captain informed me where I will be sent.
He ordered me not to take any prisoners, too.
Our experienced team meets on the helicopter pad.
The three-man team was a sergeant, a corporal, and I
Between us, not a word was even said,
As the helicopter lifted off into the midnight sky.
Silently, we land three miles behind enemy lines.
Grabbing our gear, we continue along the way.
We carefully crossed four rows of hidden land mines.
Soon, we spot our target a half a mile away.
I am told to secure the enemy guards in the shack.
When I am finished then signal all clear to the rest.
Cautiously, I take out my knife from my rucksack.
Like a snake, I crawled across the ground on my chest.
Finally, upon the unpainted guard shack, I continued to creep.
Safely, I am hidden beneath the shadows of the dark moonlight.
Taken by surprise, I stabbed the first one while he took a leak.
The other man, I killed inside the shack without much of a fight.
I signaled to the team and they approached the shack from behind.
The shack is now secure; therefore, their job now has just begun.
To the corporal I say, 'Leave me alone and I will be fine.'
He runs out the door to vomit as I picked up the dead man's gun.
This is just the first story of the many kills I have made.
This is just a vague look at the things I have done.
One night in the jungle somewhere, on the shack floor, my report said,
The U.S. Army Ranger left the body of an old man and his son.
(Copyright 2007)