Book One: The Journey Begins
(This is a fictional poetic series and short story about events that never take place and about people that have never existed. Any representation of an actual event or person is purely coincidental in nature.)
Mission Four: A bullet signed with my name.
Mission Four: A bullet signed with my name.
Today, my captain gave me another top secret mission plan.
For this mission I will be in charge of my own squad on a cold rainy night.
The Sergeant Major picked twelve well trained soldiers for me to command.
Just like every mission before, we are told to prepare for a serious fight
Noisily, the camouflaged helicopter landed beside a serene river bend.
Promptly, four of my men quickly disembarked and rushed to secured the hill.
In the darkness of the night, I immediately followed encircled by the rest of my men.
After we gather in a tight defensive formation, I informed them of who we came to kill.
I decided that it was best to separate the twelve men into three different crews.
A U. S. Army Ranger has a mixture of dangerous skills needed to take this place apart.
We are very well trained and the most effective weapon our country has to use.
After finishing the encouraging words I said, ‘It is time for our mission to start.’
Very silently each crew quickly and quietly departed each going a separate way.
My covert team carefully took most of our intended targets by surprise.
Suddenly, I turned around and killed the first enemy that day.
With my nine millimeter pistol, I shot him dead between his eyes.
From out of nowhere, sixteen of the enemy soldiers quickly surrounded us.
The team scout loudly shouted, “Hey look out! ” right before they came.
In return I shouted to my men, ’We will kill them too, if we must.’
Then came a silent twirling bullet signed with my name.
Roughly, the twirling hot bullet forcefully tore through the flesh of my  arm.
I cried out with the sounds of my pain and my team, around me, quickly gathers.
I reminded myself  that I must fight the pain; for my men I must remain calm.
If I do not mine the pain then it will not hurt; this mission is the only thing that matters.
Bravely and boldly, in the midst of the battle, we skillfully continued to fight.
The untrained and under equipped enemy quickly dies easily one by one.
We killed them all to ensure that our squad would safely escape into the night.
Finally, the last enemy fell and we waited for the other teams to be done.
A bomb that one of the other crews planted inside the enemy’s building suddenly erupt,
The building exploded into flames and through the air, pieces of bodies fly everywhere.
The team quickly gathered and waited for the camouflaged helicopter to pick us up.
Another thrilling battle has been fought and not one U. S. Army Ranger died there.
(Copyright 2007)