TIME, TIDE, DRAW NO IRONY TRAP - WORDED ART WAS EVER, EVEN NOW, REVEL LIVED. LAUD LIT MUSE, SUNG IS ODE, RARE PART, SIR. WE DO COIL OF MEGA TIME-SPAN SPOOL, EDIT SAGA, LIVE ON, ...EYE... NO EVIL, A GAS TIDE LOOPS, NAPS EMIT A GEM FOLIO CODE, WRIST RAP, ERA REDO, SIGN, USE SUM TIL DUAL DEVIL LEVER WON. NEVER EVE SAW TRADED ROW. PARTY, NOR I, ONWARD EDIT, EMIT.
Time spins headlong, helter-skelter, alpha omega its hum,
Innate energy refocussed, - hocus-pocus drawing blind, -
Merging, surging, fresh emerging each dimension is assigned
Extra frequencies as harmonies seek equilibrium.
Thrust of course is force attraction contradictions overcome -
If upset the great equation’s recreated, recombined,
Musters flux, reflux ethereal, in many ways declined -
Echo-systems spectra spectral, strata senses tuned as one.
Time from nano into nano ages stages fossil fuelled
Interspersing glaciation, dehydration, round and round
Myths upon examination show their roots as underground
Emerges, surface surges, strata cooled, their sense retooled.
Thus what once anticipation seemed probation turns as, schooled,
Independent thought’s adopted as tradition sound, profound,
Marred by nation renovation bars, or scars with strict surround
Emphasizing naught surprising, innovations overruled
Though new cycle spins unpin past wins while progress must address
Inventively the challenges its choices stimulates
Migrating through some voices, denigrating others’ traits
Eliminating those which problems pose to those whose maladdress
Tends to influence trends “safety”, “prudence” spendthrift short-term stress.
Interests vested often soften tracks orginal, contest
Modus operandi handy which could status quo divest,
Elevating into icons past emoticon success.
Time together birds of feather nests, two tendering four more
In addition for perdition they’re included in Life’s count,
Marking more for Death to tally, soon all rally scaffold mount, –
Ever higher populations soar, regenerating core.
Tortoise Time of able fable, snide greed, pride, speed, overcome -
Is it justice? Is it balance?  Those ahead soon d[r]ead behind,
Making room through swift disposals for proposals less confined,
Express need for further testing, - jesting, questing, inquest dumb.
Time, both tempter and preemptor, auctions choices bubble-gum
Into emptiness exploding, voices vacuum Lethe-lined,
Mirage are Man’s sojourn dreams it seems, all who thereon have dined
Entertain tall expectations rich which stumble, tumble numb.
Time mutates when necessary, very speedily translates
Into viral spiral gyral splicing, tip top icing cake,
Monkey to man was plan began some take as grave mistake
Enterprising Time, downsizing, soon induces second state
That leads into more selection until all that came before
Isolate in microclimate dwindles into history,
Mocking once again of mice and men eternal mystery -
‘Ergo cogito’ no guarantee can offer ‘sum’ in store.
Time destroys its own foundations, reconstructs by rule of thumb, -
Intuition tunes to pattern ducts intelligence designed.
Mankind must forward press, and quickly, or its mainspring may unwind,
Ever onward, tripping, hasty, vicious forward spiral-scrum.
Time, true master of new master, swift may slave of slave become,
In a twinkling of an eyelid, with an inkling of the mind, -
Most by wayside fall, and falling fail to rise, we seldom find
Each with grief reach silver lining welcome, wheel spins go and come.
Time, prestidigitator, spurns prestige, turns cycle score
Into room for rust when boom goes bust, to tomb entrusts the great –
Meek may seek to rise through wise disguise but dice thrown own their fate
Enters on examination predetermination’s maw.
Tide scorns pride which at its zenith ride descendant has prepared,
Idyll spills its guts and penance flags, stills, pennant’s breezy blow,
Mutes the bugle’s cry to rally round the cause to none compared -
End of story, end of glory, bared or gory end below.
Through the needle wheedle riddle evolution in its drawer
Issues ready, choosy, steady, to new factors integrate,
Measures leisure pleasure treasured as a wide tide open gate -
Exit species flooded by fresh blooded budded to explore
Timely opportunities to tease priorities to draw
Instant conclusions from confusions which did decimate
Multitudes through feuds or manners rude to war or conjugate, -
Efforts vain again are sanctionned by Time’s roar none can ignore.
Time, an excellent musician, is tradition’s drummer, drum,
Is clay pot and playful potter, Future’s watch and spring to wind,
Mocking mortals’ puny portals, while the motives of mankind
Echo ego phase or fashion, - love, hate, passion, - blink sink - done.
Texts once sacred held, identical spelled, test time’s sickle cell
Iteration till salvation’s source course changes, redefined,
Messiahs soon expire, out of synch-think with daily grind
Expressing novel grovels which old ways’ greybeards expell.
Time plays seasons, dismays reasons dumb, on much remaining mum,
In on Cause~Effect directions caught in matrix  intertwined,
Minds not evanescent effervescent reassurance blind -
Each vibration rings strange changing strings recalculating sum.
Though if sum itself is dumb then all conclusions drawn are rum
Interjections on Time’s sections, out of kilter, misaligned,
Much in golden braid internal, waits eternal, underlined
Ever by infernal pace we race to trace out space to plumb.
Time, the predator and dater, turns the bread of life to crumb,
Ices in a trice Life’s waters, hopes as halters redefined;
Magician fly, man hard may try, - high pyramids remind
Each our power, pomp pain hour stomp, vain flowers fast succumb.
Time, no evil knows, coeval  is with all, withal is none,
Irons endings through beginnings when each innings’ span’s declined
Mutating – no postdating -  wicketwards in double bind, -
Essence waxes, wanes, through axis, planes, yet what explains its run?
Tempus fugit – Time is flying – soon we’re lying in the dust,
Is it dying?  Is it buying time? – another turn to try?
Many look to book for second look, replacing painful cry,
Even though high odds against them lie when wake they take on trust.
These swift stanzas hold no moral, no bonanzas bold, no plum
Inspiring plan licks Time’s trick wick untiring, predesigned, -
Mirage tidal suicidal, bridle, bridal counter signed? –
Egg and chicken plot’s time-stricken as we quicken final strum...
Acrostic palindrome revised 30 April 2005  expanded 17 November 2006
robi03_0362_robi03_0000 AQX_DEZ
See below for initial version 10 December 1990
Time
Time, the master of the master, can the slave of slave become,
in a twinkling of an eyelid, with an inkling of the mind;
most can only fall, and falling must capsize, and thus we find
every grief has silver lining, retribution soon will come.
Time, the tortoise of the fable, pride and greed will overcome.
Is it justice? Is it balance? Those in front soon fall behind,
making room for fresh proposals, new ideas, which, less confined,
express the need for further progress, granting voices to the dumb.
Time destroys its own foundations then rebuilds by rule of thumb,
intuition finds the pattern that intelligence devined;
mankind must press forwards quickly or its mainspring will unwind,
ever onwards, tripping, hasty, in a vicious spiral-scrum.
Time the tempter and preemptor auctions choices - gubble-gum
into emptiness exploding, in a vacuum Lethe-lined,
mirage is Man’s desert sojourn, he who on false dreams has dined
entertains high expectations which too soon prove void and numb.
Time, an excellent musician, is the drummer and the drum,
is the pot as well as potter, is the watch it keeps to wind
mortality, makes mockery of the motives of mankind,
ends emotions, - love, hate, passion, - is the swimmer and the swum.
Time, the predator and dater, turns the bread of life to crumbs,
ices in a trice Life’s waters, hopes as dust are redfined;
mem’ry may be a magician but the pyramids remind
each mortal that his pomp and pow’r an hour lasts, then must succumb.
10 December  1990