Amos 3: 3, 'Can 2 walk together, except they be agreed? '
Main problem in the world today is too much controversy,
With an understanding that no one will ever be perfection,
It sure makes it a lot easier to walk in the same direction.
I've said it many times before and I will say it again,
The person saying, 'you can't' is not a true friend,
While you see a new beginning as they see the end,
Seeking to repair, they feel it's impossible to mend.
You're not a gangster so do you hang out with thugs?
You never get high but your best friend does drugs?
Who is engaged to a smoker while they hate the stink?
Why go bar hopping every night and you don't drink?
A doubter has what in common with one who believes?
Do givers like people whose only function is to receive?
Can joy or happiness be found in those that like to grieve?
What genius buys and keeps a pet that makes them sneeze?
You want the right thing; your partner yearns for the wrong,
Is there any mystery why the two of you can never get along?
Friendship in your life is never determined by color or race,
While the 'in crowd' you run with preach and practice hate?
Your soul mate is at Duke and you attend UNC, all is cool,
One is at the game, the other watches on TV that's ok too,
As long as both individuals live by and follow all the rules,
It doesn't matter that you are students in different schools.
Matthew 18: 19, 'Again I say, if two of you shall agree, '
Ecclesiastes 4: 12, talks about the greater power of three,
Psalm 133: 1, 'how good for brethren to dwell in unity, '
I trust the bible so I have no reason not to believe in 'we.'
Have you ever fixed something using tubes of Epoxy glue?
It will not become effective until you've combined the two,
Numbers 13, only Joshua and Caleb believed they could do,
From the twelve tribes of Israel in which category are you?
A basic concept behind the multiplied power of synergy,
Adding another to myself is a greater force than only me,
Giving credence to the intense pressure in common ability,
Not just left or right, with both eyes open more we'll see.
Something that I do although in scripture you will not find,
Make a confession in unison between my heart and mind,
It's a statement made when I'm in my prayer closet alone,
We all know that charity not only begins but ends at home.
To move forward we must be likeminded in our decision,
For blurred slight distorts and will only result in division,
Who can proceed in unison along the road named divide?
As allies unite to win a battle while fighting side by side.
The fastest mule will never compete with the slowest horse,
And over 60% of marriages worldwide shall end in divorce,
So, how can wedded bliss turn into bitterness and remorse?
Failure to communicate via compromise and stay the course.
What is the purpose of this poem, why this particular write?
The color of darkness is never only disguised by the night,
Be careful when choosing someone to patch or fill a need,
Amos 3: 3, 'Can 2 walk together, except they be agreed? '