Cinderella was quite a nice girl, at the start
Then her mother passed away, which broke Daddy’s heart
But “Time heals all wounds”, and again he did marry
Of Daddy’s second wife, Cindy was wary.
For the woman was vain, most jealous and proud
“I’ll make this girl suffer! ” the old hag vowed
She and her two daughters, whenever Dad was away
Made Cin sleep in the cellar – that was on a good day!
Came a time when the heir to the throne (the prince)
Sent out invites to a ball (though at some girls he did wince)
For the ball was intended to find his fair bride
Kind, caring, princessy and not stuffed with pride
Cinder’s stepsisters were ooh! so very excited
She’d never seen them more distracted, disguised and delighted
All week, in Dad’s absence, she slaved to prepare
Scrubbed their dresses, ironed scarves and dreadlocked their hair
On the night of the ball Cinders eagerly did say
“So what do you think? Purple? Light grey? ”
“But you’re not going! Her stepmother cried from chambers within
And dragged to the cellar, Cindy’s stepsissies shoved her in
Off they went to the ball in a Ferrari F5
Leaving Cin alone in the cellar to scream, rant and rave
Just as she, in her anger, was about  to hurl a chair
“Do put that down, dear” a fairy said  and appeared from thin air
“Oh god-ma, do you really think you could? ”
She could and she did, with the warning she would
Have to be back by midnight, that’s all, off you go!
In no time at all a Merc dropped her off, “Oh! Thanks, Bozo! ”
Well, what a shock she got when she stepped in to the ballroom
She cried” I don’t want HIM to be my bridegroom! ”
For the prince was not tall, dashing, dot dot dot
On the contrary, he was speckled with spots and quite short
Cindy had a perfectly horrible night
Once home, she pleaded with all of her might
“Oh god-ma, I’ve learned a jolly good lesson”,
“D’ya think you could find me a nice man…like your grandson? ”
In no time, Cindy and god-ma’s grandson were wed
He was a kind boy, caring and very well-bred
And the prince? He  still scours the whole kingdom for feet
To match a glass slipper what Cindy lost at the palace in her hurried retreat.