A twisted fear of my own emotions, my tortured temper raises,
Piercing screams, contorted thoughts, haunted by angered faces.
They race around my confused mind, and strangle all that’s sane,
They take the anger to my hand and force me to inflict pain.
My anger feeds on my tears and when its full it is ready,
Racing through my pounding veins, taking over my body.
The screams are getting louder, my veins are pumping hard,
My anger is taking over, it leaves me feeling scared.
I take the blade to my sweating skin and slowly begin to cut,
Not deep enough to reach my veins, but deep enough to hurt.
I can feel the anger flowing, trickling down my arm,
Slowly cutting into my skin, I’m beginning to feel calm.
As my anger lessens, my head begins to ache,
This fully active anger is more than I can take.
My arms display my minds illness, and still no one can see,
What my haunted, twisted mind is forever doing to me.
Once the blood dries on my arms, my anger lays to rest,
Soaking up all my tears to once again put me to the test.
My mind is now hollow and empty, all has gone away,
Though my anger is no longer here, my thoughts are still astray.
Now I’m left with nothing, I feel so numb and alone,
Not having any thoughts at all, I lay here on my own.
Its going to come back and get me, I just don’t know when,
Its going to come and take over my mind and my arms again.
The anger is part of who I am and with me it wants to stay.
No one can make me better, no one can take it away,
It wont let you take it from me, it will hide from you, you’ll see,
Then when you think that I’m ok, it will come back for me.
Don’t try to understand me, I don’t expect you to,
I just want you to help me, be there when I need you,
Forgive me when I cannot smile, sit with me when I can’t speak,
Hold out your hand to me when I am feeling weak.
I understand if you cant do this, but please don’t then tell me its ok,
Because my anger is getting stronger and will get me for good one day.