Semantics say much of what humans have created for communication with themselves and others. They only need to dissect and de-vowel, apply given nouns to their chosen adjectives. Some making more sense than when construed to define innocent verbiage of denial and with encoded killing purpose of intent.
Acceleration makes haste where risk is taken to achieve wasteful goals that reach far beyond the muscle and brawn of evolved human male ability. Life is often said to be short and so we've created many means to live it in the proverbial fast lane, crashing into all others who get in their, each other's way.
Super speed is unforgiving of human error where sounds have become the slow poke snails,  re-sounding with screaming ear drum breaking barriers of intolerance. We thank and pay tribute to all whom have helped sprout feather-less metallic wings with mechanical hearts fed with polluting Earth's exhumed death laden fossil fuels. Once left naturally interred to rest harmlessly in peace for countless eons of time.
As irony would have its devilish purpose, so there have been humans to continue to invent and circumvent  their concern for inhuman devastation. Happiness equates to Love and Freedom. To labor and share with all whom are able, to help the infant, elderly and disabled. Plentiful are there fruits of Earth's generous cornucopia. Of plenty for all whom can cargo means to barren places where weather, water and foods are scarce and unobtainable. Not able for selfish others, to obtain and self enrich far beyond their Earth bequeathed needs to survive with contentment
Why else are there un-victorious wars to aggress upon others whom also guard their greed with weapons of competitive, horrific force? They are,  in evil deed, the robotic military minorities whom are without empathy and compassion. I for one, have yet to un-spoil the spoils that my gifted able-ness was able to earn and support myself and family. A' times, my feeling extreme guilt and yet the acquiring gifted ability to help compose words that have been said to be mightier than the sword?
No longer are we challenged with the skills of an armed swords-man-
No longer are we in admiration of Bird in Flight and Ocean Life-
No longer can we protect our thresholds with sticks and stones-
No longer will we be an intelligent specie, exhumed and respected.
To have existed and not survived our own creative destruction
To have technology root itself with venomous fruits of sweet enrichment
To have none to bequeath their sorrows over our unmarked graves
To have been cursed with human brain over animal and plant
'All this and nothing much more will remain.
Few fossils of extinct life and we -
the sorrowful dusting remnants of creatures that
once thought they possessed and ruled Earth and;
yet, failed to destroy it for themselves.'
Louie Levy
9/9/2008
Please Google search;
Poet for Peace Louie Levy