Money, get away
Get a good job with more pay and your O.K.
Money it's a gas
Grab that cash with both hands and make a stash…….(Pink Floyd)
Apparently to Hillary Clinton Presidential Campaign
- did not have enough of it.
To think, Hillary with all her clout, with Bill’s clout,
With her being the First Lady for eight years,
(even though she was in a corner,
While Monika played First Mistress, after all Bill was hornier)
The Clintons are worth ten of millions of dollars,
Then why do her campaign aides work for free,
At least one month, are they altruistic or that naïve?
Barack (or some bumbling reporter said his name Barrack, (as in barracks)
I wonder if Gomer Pyle, USMC had something to do with this?)
Raised the bar by getting huge endorsements Oprah, Sweet Caroline, (bop-bop-bop) ,
The terminator’s wife and lastly a man,
Senator Ted Kennedy,
By his actions or inactions,
was responsible for the death of Mary Jo Kopekne
(see observation Well Hello Mary Jo)
And Money, three times the amount Hillary raised in January.
Hillary was bound by the recent voter’s laws and laws governing the PAC.
She attempting to beat Obama by outspending him, therefore she will be,
The Leader of the PAC(k) .  She learned it from Ron Reagan vicariously,
Ron Regan led the USA to outspend and out produce the Soviet Union.
That is why there was not shot fired between the NATO and Warsaw Pact troops,
That brought an end to the Cold War which existed for a half century.
But Barack learned as well. He is the underdog,
Like in the last Super Bowl XLII, he is the Giant,
Not from New York,
Ready to close in on Hillary in the last two minutes of the game, the final warning.
His campaign is self-reliant,
he does not ask his workers to work for free,
If the Democrats are smart they should stay with Barack,
Come to think of it I hadn’t heard from Bill in awhile,
it’s not his style,
So his campaign strategy for Hillary backfired,
to belittle an opponent took some guile.
(2-7-2008)