Accomplished verse must whizZ
Zestfully forwards as imagination's fleA
Bites author's itchy fingers. Cells greY
Yearn to coin expressions. Gift of gaB
Crafts timeless phrases which waX
Xanadu with Coleridge nectar, emotive gamut pedantiC,
Devise surprising riddles whose fair floW
Will appeal to all who reaD
Empathetic intellect must reV
Vers libres, prose or traditional versE,
Free or formally structured, before life says adieU.
Unlimited possibilities, both flexible and stifF
Glow, grow and encourage lighT
Themes, weighty arguments, or emotional sonG,
Heavy here, light there, unpretentiouS.
Sure instinct stimulates inner growtH.
Insight, acting as an intellectual spuR,
Rewards readers and writer where not restricted to the 'I'.
Judgemental values shed from Zimbabwe to IraQ.
Quest for immortality, perceived as holy hadJ,
Karmic grail, is accorded toP
Priority for life's boat that sooner or later springs a leaK,
Leaving little to survive Lethe's oblivion shampoO
Or inspire others to saiL
Manfully upon seas uncharted by other men or womeN.
New forms in themselves add no gleaM
Native to poetry, often lose steaM,
Marred by inaccessibility. Experiments abecedariaN
Or atonal contemporary 'e-zines' under whatever vanity labeL
Leave much to be desired, their quality is frequently toO
Poor to last, too topical, too obscure, or too darK.
Keep in mind that the poet's creative leaP -
Quest, or self-centred search for memorial TaJ
Jehan - longs to build in verse or prose colloQ
Remains elusive to all using writing as an existential alibI
Ineffective at hiding inadequacy. Flaw and erroR,
Self-defeating, never stay the course, double bogey their entH
Half-hearted drive towards proverbial Elysian green pastureS.
Thus, whole unwon not hole in one. Keats' 'eternal longinG'
Goes phut, stutters, stumbles, falls, fails forgotten, inspiration cuT,
Undone ambitions, pointless lemming clifF.
Final verdict left to self-styled critics acting in lieU,
Vainly attempt to catch Fame's eyE,
Efforts dissipated, meeting the same fate as BrezhneV
Whose invasion of Afganistan leaD
Directly to Soviet collapse. Poetry represents harmonic undertoW
Xcluding tongue-in-cheek prolifiC
Coarse catchwords such as those in this particular heliX.
Years later this thesis may, although written adliB,
Become a classic example of erudite poetic wordplaY
Zebra stripes critically stripped for sense  - a pizza extravaganzA
Acrostic masking kabbalistic meanings beneath literary pizzazZ.
The first line begins with A and ends with Z
the next line begins with Z and ends with A
The next line begins with B and ends with Y
The next line begins with Y and ends with B
The next line begins with C and ends with X
The next line begins with X and ends with C etc etc etc
26 February 2009 revised 26 September 2016