Wonderful Birds Flamingo (Chance Operations)
February 13, 2019
Flamingo, a large colorful bird
In South America and Africa well found
In the warmer areas of southern Europe and western Asia is also seen
Yet it is not an uncommon bird
Phoenicopteridae is its scientific name;
It stays in flocks of up to around 200 birds
Feeds on fish in stiller rivers and lakes
It normally gets to about 30 years old
Some also get 50 years;
Most species of flamingo are a pinky/orange colour,
Some however can be white, black or even blue.
The colour of the flamingo comes from
The flamingo eating a type of algae that Then turns the flamingo into the bright pink birdthat
We are so familiar with.
The flamingo is often seen on the banks of the lake
Standing on one leg.
The flamingo is actually sleeping
When it is on one leg but the strange thing is
That only half of the flamingo is actually asleep
The half that contains the leg still standing remains active.
The flamingo then swaps over
So that the remaining side can get some rest and The side that was sleeping becomes active again.
There are six different species of flamingo found around the world.
The different flamingo species are the greater flamingo
Which is the most widespread species of flamingo
Found in Africa, Southern Europe and Southern Asia.
The lesser flamingo is the most numerous species
Of flamingo and is found in Africa and Northern India.
The Chilean flamingo is a large species of flamingo that is found in South America.
The James's flamingo is a small and delicate species of flamingo
That is found in the Andes mountains in Peru,
Chile, Bolivia and Argentina.
The Andean flamingo is closely related to the James's flamingo
And is also found in the Andes mountains in Peru, Chile, Bolivia
And Argentina.
The American flamingo is a large species of flamingo that is found in the Caribbean islands and the Galapagos islands.
Flamingos use their large,
Oddly shaped beaks to filter shrimp out of the water.
The flamingo uses it's strangely shaped upside-down beak to separate mud and food in the water.
The mouth of the flamingo is covered in little hairs called lamellae
Which assist in the filtering of water and the flamingo
Also has a rough tongue
Which the flamingo also uses to help it to filter food
Out of the water.
Although flamingos only nest once a year,
Flamingo colonies are known to breed at any time of the year.
A flamingo reaches sexual maturity
Which means the flamingo is able to breed
When the flamingo is between 3 and 6 years old
Flamingos build their nests out of mud, stones
And feathers and do so about 6 weeks before they lay their eggs.
Flamingos tend to lay just one egg
That hatches after a 30 day incubation period. Both the mother flamingo and the father flamingo are known to help
To raise the flamingo chick
Flamingos have relatively few predators in the wild
But this is dependent on the area in which the flamingo inhabits.
Human hunters,
wild dogs and crocodiles are the main predators
Of the flamingo, along with eagles that prey upon the flamingo eggs
And vulnerable flamingo chicks.
Human beings should protect flamingos for keeping the environment well.