Well, come to the new years ball,
have a fun time celebratin' the funeral of 1999...
'twas a heckofatic time, slime, mime, a promise of a better time, asses worked to the tale bone, pockets vacant, awaiting the lotaree of hopeless winnings spent of dreamin' losers, enjoyin' the pitance of a security, socialized, Roosevelts scam of the century, leaves old tired farts with no more to live on than scrounging snails in a garden of tumbleweeds, BUTT! there's still soap, water and free sunshine,9huntread and 9ty bucks for $1.99Ct sneakers of the 30's, no nice Jewish bred boy would ever wear a painter's dung-agree blue ripped pants, Levis, ?
HA i wondered weather one of my cousins invented the 'poor mans' shameful garb, models have the style, bigdeal kalvin klein put his own label name, and; the other crooked legged punks did the same, poor kids in mexico, eye think get a nickle or a dime, or maybe 'nough for a handful of riced beans to sew them for the crookiteers, Oh Yeah! tawk 'bout, write about, sneer for or accept, the price for fuel, milk, bread, rent, not to mention what it took to replace a 5ct trolley ride, eye could go on+on, u all know, if you're considered an antique of life, belly belt bustin', wide hip whipped creamed abuser, grey and clairolded defusered, and an invain irreplacement 'Dude', that got taken for a bald spot and touped for hairty hundred shmucked bucks, Forgive me Lord, of the universe, over seer of chanooka, xmas, budda, devoties of the services that knock on doors, and wanna save ass', i tell them it's much to late, as i turn to face them, ooops, aren't we all, 'about face' one way or an other? , i think eye still have all the soul savin' pamflit writlits stashed somewhere, fearing, that my world would come to an end before i see the new born,2000 babe if i throwthemout, go'head, if you're the one to dare, make a resolution! , promise yourself to? not? be? a? potty pooper and knitcrap into the next millenium without the protection of, life insurance and at least, some eyesorely credited degrees and a high sat tas phd xyz and; all ways to have; an ample supply of latexed peepee gloves....
Gotta get ready to feast with the loving Christian side of my family, I do love them, why? even some of my best friends are all
gentiles, as for the Hebrews, oh! well, they're still trying their case and i ain't takin' no sides, not even 'french fries'
Louie Levy
12 25 99
11: 59 8 7 6 5 4 2.....iz the ball on the way down, will it reach the bottom or not move a'tall? ?
Lurking in human minds, can be seen an alien, named 'y2k', Y this year,2 thousand idiot years, now smart, dependant on machines to run the clocks of fate, control our lives, deplete our impoverished security, and rob our very spirits of the unpredictable predictable, cancel all flights, ground the pidgeons, save our eagles, withdraw for the dresser draws and sleep on the doughed mattress, afraid to leave it unattended, woe's to the 'lectronic crazed minds of kids that hacked us unto the future of space roboted 'puter robbing monsters, hardly reassembling the dead flesh corpses of poor misunderstood 'Frankenkind',
2 million, times 2 eyes times billions, lookin at a lit spitball? freezin' their asses with no where to pee or shitinsight,
'oh honey! please hold it in, go'head, let it out, no one will notice the ice sickles frozen from your fly, we CAN'T miss the 'BALL' cummin' down for the Earth, aren't ya proud we're here in Newyawkcity? what a pity, they're nuts all here with us, it's not the same, TV lookin' at our one and only bawl, HEY! eye think it's movin'! ! !
what if it won't cum down? , will we turn upside frown, the subways will be stuck, howl we get home, i toldya i didn't wanna come,
hey schmuck! stop pushin' and get your paw of my..., this is NO time for that, later, the ball's cumin' down! yeah yeah yeah! 3 2 1... whew! she made it, we're saved! '
'HAPPY NEW YEAR! ' world,
did all your balls work like ours? sure hope so, after all,
We in New Yawk, have the greatest one, ball, that is, in the hole world! and now we gotta put it back for next year, hmmm,
what if we don't even have no balls then and they just show pictures?
Oh well, who cares?
'i just love your hand on my, ooops, it's gettin' warmer every year, greenhouse aflick, ya know? ? '
Migrated Louie Levy
TV, at home in Southern Ca
2000