I am proud of my husband because he had the strength to work and take care of me and our child.
I am Proud of my husband because he had allowed me to be a stay Home Mom while many husbands send their wives to work outside home.
I am proud of my husband because he never reminds me of my past sorrows.
I am Proud of my Husband because He is a wonderful father and a Great Provider.
I am Proud of my Husband because he encourages me to be Godly Mother, Godly wife and to be a Godly example.
I am proud of my husband and the job that he does because he is very talented and brilliant in his job.
I am Proud of my husband because he is very generous to the poor and needy.
I am Proud of my husband because his colleagues in his office praise him for his helping nature.
I am Proud of my husband because he is kind and friendly with the neighbors.
I am proud of my husband because he trusts me completely in everything.
I am proud of my husband because he is not greedy for money, possessions.
I am Proud of my husband because he sings worship songs that glorify God.
I am Proud of my husband because he teaches prayers, scriptures and Godly ways to our children.
I am proud of my husband because he does not lust at other women.
I am Proud of my husband because is kind and compassionate, Hardworking and truthful.
I am proud of my husband because he fears God and is obedient to His Word.
I am proud of my husband because he is trying his very best to be a Godly person, bringing our family to desire Christ and to seek God's glory.
I am proud of my husband because he is committed to our marriage; he has kept the marriage vows in spite of problems and challenges in the marriage.
I am proud of my husband because of his understanding and caring nature, inspite of we both coming from a different culture and different opinion.
I am proud of my husband because even though we have major differences, inspite of it we get along and come unity in Christ.
I am proud of my husband because he is loving, caring and He prays for me and for my children every day before God.
I am proud of my husband because our children Love and obey him with proper respect.
I am proud of my husband because he is a good leader, willing to put God first and our marriage next.
I am proud of my husband because when he does mistakes he is willing to ask forgiveness.
I am proud of my husband because he is courageous, caring and loving towards animals.
I am Proud of my husband because he is willing to give himself to me and our family.
I am proud of my husband because he doesn't allow me or my daughter exposing our bodies with inappropriate clothes.
I am proud of my husband because of his true and committed love for me and for our family.
I am proud of my husband because he avoids morally corrupted people around our family.
I am proud of my husband because he encourages and supports to practice our Christian faith, to grow in Godliness, to keep away from dangers and evils affecting from outside.
I am proud of my husband because he is not addicted to wine, not self-centered and controlling, not a gambler, not a smoker, not a womanizer.
I am proud of my husband because he manages the household well.
I am proud of my husband because of his everlasting marriage commitment
I am so proud of my husband that I get to share my life with him.
I'm always so proud to be the one next to him.