Ladies and Gentlemen, in this corner the challenger,
Presenting Satan, the ultimate deceiver,
And in this corner, his opponent the Champion,
Christ Jesus, the Lord & Savior of all believers.
The referee calls the combatants to the center of the ring,
To go over the rules and regulations,
Jesus must be honest, sincere, by the book on every thing,
Satan can lie, cheat, steal, whatever, he has no limitations.
This is the battle we wage everyday in our mind,
Satan might win however, strength in the Lord believers find,
Ways and means to upstage the devil and win the fight,
United in Christ Jesus we climb to higher heights.
Lucifer is the ultimate deceiver; trust him not,
Through the Blood of Jesus, he can be stopped,
Even with hatred and cheating, Christ still kicked his behind,
Jesus' brothers and sisters will have life of a different kind.
Fellow Christians, we must allow Jesus to show His Love,
Through us to all of the others, just as He did because,
Love wins more for Him than hate could ever claim too,
Stand fast; love your enemies, as Jesus said to do.
This is a fight of faith, which is the ultimate test,
You must win this one to be victorious in all the rest,
Like mouse droppings warn you of the ultimate pest,
Never go into battle without the Word, your bulletproof vest.
To be the ultimate means that something is the absolute best,
Your spiritual team is undefeated then there’s all the rest,
Satan caused angels already in heaven his crap to believe,
How much harder could it be for the devil to fool you and me?
Yielding a jaw bone, Samson destroyed 1,000 not just one man,
Wrestled the king of beast, killing the lion with his mighty bare hands,
A warrior like no other before or since has a champion ever been found,
With all that might and power it took one Delilah to bring him down.
One serpent in the garden, a thought implanted, the deception began,
Even after God almighty had instructed the only woman and man,
As fighters do, dance around, stay on your toes, bob then weave,
The evil one will throw all kinds of punches to mislead and deceive.
No matter how bad things look or how terrible they sound,
Do not let the lies of the devil intimidate or push you around,
Continue to stand fast till the fight is over you and will be found,
Crowned with a victory not in shallow but on hallowed ground.