Just economy, science and technology can't make society progress;
Knowledge of economy and technology can't make education complete
Sans humanities like literature, arts, history and religion anywhere!
Globalization of economy of nations has started financial competition;
Sophistication, comfort and luxury need more money to maintain;
Economic development at the cost of social development brings all ills!
Modern world by technological advancement has made civilized society;
Civilized world is a farce due to hunger, poverty, unemployment and ills;
Materialistic pursuit to become rich has made man into machine-beast-man!
Reforms are needed in education and governance to promote human culture;
Real civilization can be built only by fostering human culture from the start
For harmonious human development towards perfection desirable and healthy.
Today's industrialized world society is heading towards dystopia only sure
As was depicted by Aldous Huxley in his Brave New World to warn world
And by George Orwell in his novels like Animal Farm or 1984 in 1930s itself!
Technologically brainwashing the people as was envisaged by T S Eliot......
The world can be turned only as The Waste Land sans human sense and feeling
Driving the world to the brink of destruction with people having death wish ever!
Technological supremacy and terrorism threatening world peace as two forces
Opposing each other like the fight between civilization and fanaticism show
Very clearly underscoring the need for harmonious human perfect in society!
To change people with indifferent attitude, insensible nature and inhuman mind
Only the education that kindles individuals to aspire for cultural advancement
Can enrich human value leading towards human perfection that has power
To appreciate beauty and bring out truth in all to disseminate love and joy!
1 'Culture only provides power to understand and enjoy best things in life
Like books, pictures and music connecting work and play into one piece'
And is the best way of life for best thoughts, talks and deeds in the world!
2“Culture lies in the love for and study of and pursuit of human perfection; '
This is the harmonious expansion of all the powers that certainly make
The beauty and the worth of human nature possible to realize in life……!
2“Pursuit of human perfection is the pursuit of beauty and truth, and….
Hellenistic knowledge of Greek Classical beauty for achieving excellence
In human nature and Hebraic idea of Jewish action of fulfilling will of God! ”
2“Human spirit behind all the great works of literature, arts, science and religion
Aims at the harmonious human perfection leading towards the development of
All the sides of humanity, ” which is the job of human culture in the world ever!
3Philosophy is the love of, study of and pursuit of knowledge, wisdom and truth;
Knowledge is acquired by hearsay, experience, reasoning and intuition and also,
It is obtained by sense experience, mind, ideas out of impression and reason!
3Mental stimulus is transformed into perception to conception or ideas;
Perception is disordered stimulus and conception is ordered perception;
Science is ordered conception and wisdom is ordered life in the world!
Education that does not provide philosophic touch and human culture
But only civilization by science and technology will make the world a hell
That destroys art, literature and nature leading to the extinction of humans!
References:
I The Creation of One World by T A Ramesh
II 1. Does Culture Matter Today? by E M Foster
II 2. Culture and Anarchy by Matthew Arnold
II 3. History of World Philosophy by Will Duran