STRUCTURE & FORM IN POETRY.  Classical Poetry always has Structure even though it does not always rhyme. The Structure gives it metere and flow which facilitates reading and recitation. In my book - recitability is an essential character of a good Poem! . A lesser know Poetical Structure is RHYME ROYAL which inposes a strict metre (usually imabic pentameter)   and a strict rhyming pattern a b a b b c c. Each verse must consist of seven lines. The number of verses is optional!  As an Environmental Scientist I am concerned with the Conservation of Water which is the subject of this Rhyme Royal
Whence comes this water that we need for life?
Where does it go when we flush it away?
A shortage in some countries causes strife
Will it run out like coal and oil one day?
For all resources there's a price to pay.
We all use water - like it was for free
Just turn the tap - it's there for you and me.
God touched the clouds and made the rain - from the rain
Formed the sea and from the sea formed the clouds
To rise and cool and give us rain again.
The rain provides the water for the crowds.
When it evaporates it goes back to the clouds.
Each dropp of water makes our lives secure
But every day we're using more and more.
The Planet Earth has water everywhere
Liquid or a solid or a vapour
In oceans - rivers - lakes and in the air
Icecaps or on frozen lakes like paper.
We scrape it off our windscreens with a scraper!
Mountain stream - boiling steam and freezing snow
A lolly ice?   Thanks very nice - It is all  H 2 O.
The Water Cycle keeps the water going
Round and round - none's lost to outer space
Precipitation - raining - hailing - snowing
Moves the water round from place to place.
Especially when a snowball hits your face.
Streams and rushing rivers keep it all in motion
Then water falls down waterfalls and ends up in the ocean!
Water Water everywhere - for our daily needs
Turn the tap and use the river and the well
Don't pollute - don't dam the spring that feeds
Without 'clean water' life on Earth is Hell!
Clean Water has no taste - no clour and no smell.
Water Water everywhere - please please stop and think
Water Water everywhere - but not one dropp to drink! ! ! ! !
(John Knight - Frozen Colchester - December 2009)