Sun setting before us, blazing gently against our eyes,
multitudes sitting, awaiting their son's and daughter's
graduation.
Excitement seeps between people, permeating the atmosphere,
quiet murmuring floating about the evening sky.
Down below us, folding chairs timidly standing upright on
the grass, waiting emptily for the teenagers who will soon
pass another milestone in their lives.
High School band, sitting quietly, bouncing notes and tunes
about their heads.
Creeping silently into view, red and white caps and gowns
grow below us, pride sits silently in our eyes, soon to flow
in the form of joyous tears.
Faculty filing in, taking their seats of ready achievement,
as silence filters through the crowd, allowing the speaker
his voice of congratulations.
Watching the procession file in with their caps circling
their heads, looking up and out, clouds can be seen circling
the heavens also.
As the sun continues to set on the far horizon, our son's
and daughter's lives are also setting on their futures,
gratuitous clapping for faculty and band quickly over, thank
God!
Hopes and dreams, tender and innocent fill the air as graduates
speak words, not knowing they are only beginnings of volumes
yet to come.
Forever young, the theme tonight, holds a thread which wishes
to stay forever, yet tomorrow will be forgotten.
Not on purpose is it ever done, age and years just seem to cover
over the dreams of the young.
Painted colors in the sky mix and blend, beginning to match
the colors of the caps and gowns worn below us on the football
field.
Voices ringing loudly, singing the Alma Mater to all, as
darkness swells and curls around us sitting in the bleachers,
yet lights shine down, reflecting on the graduating class.
The lives of many children wait breathlessly on edges of their futures, clinging ever so slightly to their pasts.
Musical words blast their way to our hearts, maybe a crumb or
note or two may remain for all ages, our future sons and
daughters remaining in our minds forever young.
Happiness fills the graduates as they receive their diplomas,
glee stands out for all of us to hear and see.
Riotous applause surrounds the sky as each diploma is handed
to a student, graduation being almost completed.
Mechanics of this graduation are over as the tassels are put
from left to right on every student's cap.