The lines below are taken from Sri Aurobindo's epic poem Savitri- book I Canto Four- The Secret Knowledge.
Savitri is an epic spiritual poem written in Blank verse. It is based on a legend from Mahabharat an epic book of sanskrit translated in various languages. In 'Savitri', through Sri Aurobindo's vision it becomes a symbol of the human soul's spiritual destiny.
I am posting them here for their poetic beauty and the hope and aspirations that these lines provide to the future of humanity.
August 15th is Sri Aurobindo's birthday.
A title and subtitle are provided only for the sake of the title.
Savita Tyagi
Our Challenges And Divine Grace
Even when we fail to look into our souls
Or lie embedded in earthly consciousness,
Still, we have parts that grow towards the light
Yet there are luminous tracts and heavens serene
And Eldorados of splendor and ecstasy
And Temples to the godhead none can see.
A Shapeless memory lingers in us still
And sometimes when our sight is turned within,
Earth's ignorant veil is lifted from our eyes;
There is a short miraculous escape.
This narrow fringe of clamped experience
We leave behind matted ti us as life,
Our little walks, our insufficient reach.
Our soul can visit in great lonely hours
Still regions of imperishable light,
All-seeing eagle-peaks of silent Power
And moon-flamed oceans of swift fathomless Bliss
And calm immensities of spirit space.
In the unfolding process of the self
Some times the inexpressible Mystery
Elects a human vessel of descent.
A breath comes down from a supernal air,
A Presence is born, a guiding Light awakes,
A stillness falls upon the instruments:
Fixed motionless like a marble monument,
Stone-calm the body is a pedestal
supporting a figure of eternal Peace.
Or a revealing Force sweeps blazing in;
Out of some vast superior continent.
Knowledge breaks through trailing its radiant seas,
And Nature trembles with the power, the flame.
A greater personality sometimes
Possesses us which yet we know is ours:
Or we adore the Master of our souls.
Then the small bodily ego thins and falls:
No more insisting on its separate self,
Losing the punctilio of its separate birth,
It leaves us one with Nature and with God.