I woke up in an insane asylum; does this mean my mind numb?
Tried to break out of the padded room, because I can’t feel any sun
Can’t reach any fun from a psycho unless he has a gun
Doctors try to evaluate me, but I look at them and told them…
“How can you evaluate something that’s over 100 degrees?
Something that’s already weak to his knees! ? !
Damn it I barely wish I can breathe! ! ! ”
But damn it I shouldn’t have explain myself, you guys already know the story
How can I reach new heights? I have no wealth, just another road without glory
But instead I am replaced with so many worries; couldn’t eat and had to tell Cory
That meal wouldn’t be served, the hardest thing to explain, so couldn’t say a word
Wife kicked me to the curb for a guy with more cash
I came at him with a chainsaw and he hauled ass
I became delusional and felt immovable, love sadly isn’t fusible
Felt invincible but felt unusable, wish my mind was mutable
So I plummet to death not worrying about my kid
Only because my pain couldn’t resist
Kept telling myself it would be better if I didn’t exist
Couldn’t feel my powerfulness only felt the dirt with no grit
I kept wondering after I was saved, by a magical mage in a cave
Was I blinded by mist? Or was it because my life was never glazed
Never had nothing more than trailer, wasn’t much more than a failure
“Hey you are blinded by nightmares, stop acting so fake
You were not saved by mage in a cave, don’t lie like a snake
You were saved by me, the brother that vowed to keep you safe”
Hey you have no right to criticize; you see all this magic beneath my features?
You are just here to glorify, do you see all the blood that bestows my t-shirt?
Before I came here I fell feet first, broke bones but didn’t die
I wish my body was align with demons so my soul wouldn’t be mines
Made up my mind I will fail my kids, I must keep away, this isn’t a fib
You just can’t see through the list, the people that overcame that were bums
But you fail to realize that I am not one of them, I am barely over dirt scum