Cry Of Krishna
Come back O Radhe, come back.
Air is achy, woods are weeping
while Yamuna mourns your absence.
My heart is agonized,
my flute crying your name in pain.
Come back O Radhe, come back.
Feel pain of our flower bed
it cries for softness of your embrace.
Feel pain of west breeze
it laments absence of your fragrance.
Feel pain of moonlit sky
it awaits grace of your gorgeous face.
I am so alone, so abandoned o Radhe.
I promise, I won't hurt you again.
Come back o love, come back.
Wrap your tender arms around my waist,
sweeten my agrieved soul
with honey of your ample bosom.
With your musical whisper,
heal my achy heart and fill my empty nest.
O love, don't you remember that dusk
when I was playing flute
and you, dancing with golden glow of Sun?
Your lotus face was beaming with joy,
your ocean eyes were smiling in ecstasy,
your rose lips were spreading fragrance of flower,
your dancing breasts were laughing in rapture.
Putting your arms around my shoulder,
you danced rhythm of a river while I played song of a sea.
Jubilant Sun forgot to disappear,
enchanted air forgot to flow,
gleeful birds forgot to sing.
O Radhe, what is more enchanting for this world,
than union of Radhey and Krishna?
What is more blissful for human,
than the sight of Krishna in embrace of Radhey?
How could you forget that moonlit night,
when you and me were all alone in bank of Yamuna?
Above, moon was happy smiling,
and down to our feet; Yamuna was singing.
While resting your head on my lap,
you were counting stars.
My friend "The Wind",
carried my unspoken desire to you.
In haste you stood up. You took me to rose bed.
A sudden brisk breeze blew up your girdle clothes
from your sculpted waist.
With beauty of a naked star,
you were standig before me.
Your waist was impatient like a new born river,
painfully eagar to flow from majestic mountain.
Your cheeks were shy, lips quivering, breathing gasping.
As if you drank from cup of "God Of Desires".
Your breasts clothes fell off
revealing fruits of your flowery garden.
The fervor, the fragrance of your flourishing flowers
set fire within me.
The shine, the lustre of your buttery softness
awakened every cell, every drop of blood within me.
Wild and impatient, I pulled you down to my breast.
Thirsty and insane, I kissed you wildly.
You were sighing, shaking, shivering, screaming.
As if earth being plundered by storm,
garden being drowned by overflown river,
cloud being touched by thunderbolt.
As you woke up to awarness,
you noticed Sun appearing in east.
In annoyance you whispered,
"Krishna, could you hide Sun for another day? "
O princess, o my love,
see the shadow beneath eyes of Krishna,
see the stream of tears rolling down his cheek,
feel the suffering of his saddened soul,
hear the murmur of his mourning heart.
I am torn apart, saddened, agonized, writhing in pain.
My heart beat sings your name, my flute laments your name.
Where are you O Radhey, where?
Come back O love, come back.
© Arun Maji
Painting