Imagine
what that
lion looks like
to a 12-year-old!
Talk about that WTF
Jimmy Hendrix Experience!
All I did was drop a tiny tab!
That weapons grade 25' only
true warriors survived! With mind
intact and thoughts exacting, extracting
examining, exhuming, exhausting, exulting's…
Now… how about that tic-tac! Slugging back a
40 of Topo-Chico agua mineral and smokin faux
cubans… machine rolled too tight… like a new trigger!
Phuuck! getting the throat burn like I was drinkin me
some of that there corona! "Hunting, Fishing, and Loving
Every day! " Imagery… what a difference a good day with my
in-law makes! Fresh painted nails… blood orange soda
downed… electric blanket on… listenin to Danelle Steel
audio books… and IAM only out of pocket 160 bucks!
Whatever! Schist! What I could do back in those
Patpong daze with an hour and those bucks! Decisions
decisions whom judges all the decisions made… on a
worldwide basis? Phuuck! Who da Phuck cares! Each of US
awake and stare… at that potential for the corona to drink
US! Corona plied donkey/monkey/whatever fried virus and
chips! sans the wrap! Good ole London daily! Pass the
vinegar! And don't breathe while you eat! Six feet? Da
phuuck! just blow out a bit of your halitosis breath through
that single ply dust mask! But before you do… put your
night shades on and bow you head… fog! 25 feet needs
are apparent once your glasses clear up! How are you
to every go shopping again? 25 phuucking feet and no
breeze! Where are we really suppose to be to be safe!
In outer phuucking space! Phuuck! Phuuck! Phuuck!
This is some serious pile of schist all those
"ists" got each of US into! You now know someone
who passed? More than like not precisely from just the
corona! But ifin it was a phatty, with other indications
tough! Burn that corpse! And then burn those ashes twice!
How is this Abideen? Not much quotin or bouncing herein!
No music, no video, no Hadaka Matsuri, Meshach, or Abednego!
Wait a momentum! What da phuck? "Re-education" and that
"special training" … "Bel, Marduk, Venus and Nebo" Ergo ego
eggo' and coconut syrup! Just get me some ‘Sticky Rice'
and mango! And some ‘Tậk tæn h̄nwd s̄ận yoyo'!
However, for my tastes from my memories of
my passed moments round here… there ain't
nothing that beats the taste of warm puddy!
I mean… any one out there ever have a taste of
cold puddy? What! you work in a morgue! Phuuck!
No wonders "The Donald' has those bags under
his eyes! Where was I… Where AMI? What? Who IAM?
Good guessin that mates! That is like asking me that
question: Where you from? Where do you think dumb
asp! MY FATHER! Thought: now that is a proposition!
I thought therefore I think! Which came first? Who?
Bat goo on the hoof! Phuuckin Poseurs! Collecting
flying rat schist and tagging and bagging and dragging
that shite back to town! What purpose for? Could they
have not gone to the Sewage Treatment Plant and netted
a few ‘blind mullets" a whole heck of a lot easier! Phuuck!
‘Rightist, Centralist, Leftist'… Cilantro, Cello, Cento…
Yea now you know that IAM knows… it is just to simply
stupid to attempt to become more simply red than lil'ole'meo'!
IAM phuucking retired Yo! IAM a speed reading and typing
fool! Who were those two phuucking aliens at that desk
in that movie "Men in Black"? Sumptom and Bob? Phuuck!
How bout those "Boyz in that Band" who just woke up?
Singing along now? With Young and tender Shirley?
Hounding hers wit dat "Good Ships Lollipop"!
Dirty old men! Whatever AMI gonna dose yoose wit!
"Great Gobs of Goose Shite"? Smudge your cheeks
with some mo-o-dat-bat schist! Snake Eyes!
Cold and deep… mesmerizing… hypnotizing
Hyper-training… pulling a train! Phuuck!
I been watchin dis off me front stoop…
Birds, chorus, birds chorus, birds chorus
I feed birds scraps from da house table
birds schist like elephants! All da flowers
gets streaked whit lightening schists!
Birds sing dat same song! I feed da
birds all daze long… AMI I producing
avian flu, by feed da birds human food?
Who da phuuck knows! Who keeps the
earth from moving? No body you fools!
Not one of you learn about perpetual motion!
Fortune, forks tuned, folk tunes, faux fonts
pity phuucks, power phuucks, revenge phuucks
phuuckin ducks flying over Folsom! Johnny Cash
Cassius Clay, Fumundacheez, dirty kneed yellow
fleshed laboratory aides! Aids? Hiv? Phuuck me!
Nonononnono! Just saying! So, this little miss
muffet named corona… not it is Sars-CoV-2
push the buttons on that mutterfatter and
add, a fused much earlier year dates back
from 2-019-2020 and discover when that
was christened! Really great big Phuuck!
That corona "V" is an easier toed swallow by
populations cuz it is relative to the past
titles of less capable of murder "Vs"!
give di view over and reed lou… Yea!
‘never ending war' ‘war president' "War"
in-a-four-cornered room… witches on brooms
bitches not wearing britches my kinda-o-pleasures
bare shavin not furred preferred purr-it-fits tightly so!
and some very firm hand holds up front and sentinel!
Ala das Khadafy! He was phuuckin bonkers but had
the correct number of that gender tendering
his under! 24/7/365! What does your pride
loki lic? Phat purse big paper t-notes?
IAM game! You ever seen many?
22 chair dining tables many?
piles and plies of traceable
certs worth billions in bullion?
and "D" flawless facets? Just askin!
Ohura sits on my sitar… wildest teen
dream ever! Time to close the vault
doors on this prose… try not to be
to nosy… or second guesting
I gots a warehouse full…
lockers… rockem sockers
snooker tables and vests and
those little ties… wiseguys!
Have a gong adultswim
re-lax whenever… "WE"
have all of the time
on the planet…
form: imagery