This is for every girl that has gossiped about me.
This is for every boy that has ever broken my heart.
This is for all the friends that I thought I had, but in the end just turned out to be backstabbers.
This is for all the people that told me I couldn’t make it.
This is for anyone that has ever said I wasn’t good enough.
This is for all the ones that enjoyed kicking me while I was down.
This is for all the ones that pushed me behind just as I was getting ahead.
This is for all the people that have ever made me feel less than what I really was.
This is for all the kids that made fun of me because I was different.
This is for the ones that told me I was a failure, and made me believe it.
Because of you, I am the person that I want to be.
Because of you, I have learned to overcome all the insults that have been thrown at me.
You challenged me to fight for the kind of life that I wanted, not the kind of life you saw for me.
I am a much stronger person than I used to be.
I’m not that weak little girl that you used to know.
I’m not that little kid that wouldn’t mount to anything.
I am so much more than that.
Because of your judgment I have realized that nothing would hold me back.
You have done so much more than you think.
So, thanks.
This is to any person that has ever befriended me.
This is to every hand that has ever helped me when I was down.
This is for everyone that believed in me.
This is to all the people that gave me strength to follow my dreams.
This is for all the people who taught me to figure out who I am, and to accept the person I became.
This is for anyone who has ever said, “Good job! ” when I thought that I had ruined everything.
This is for all the people that stood behind me.
This is for all the ones that stood up for me.
This is to all the people that had hopes for me, even when I didn’t have any for myself.
This is for all the people that pushed me to go forward, even at times I wanted to stop completely.
Without you, I wouldn’t be who I am today.
Without you, I would still be the “nothing” that everyone thought I was.
Without you, I would still be that scared little girl, afraid to try anything new.
You made me realize how much I was really worth.
You made me realize that I wasn’t alone.
You made me realize that the world hadn’t turned it’s back on me,
I turned my back on the world.
Because of you, I am the person that I have always wanted to be.
Because of you, I like who I am.
Because of you, My entire life has changed for the better.
So, thanks.