The Flowers of the Future
-At present you plant a seed of truth, for your beautiful blossoms of the future
I am a diligent gardener,
Who walked into your heartland by chance,
I saw the large land out of cultivation,
Seems there has not been a spring for a long time.
So I said,
'Let's cultivate here a little. Make it a lawn.'
You said impatiently,
'Forget it! You are wasting your effort.'
I smiled,
'Let's grow some flowers here and make it a garden.'
You hesitated and said,
'Forget it. I don't see any meaning in it.'
I drew your hand to me and put a seed in it, a sparkling seed with fantastic splendour.
'This seed is called Truth.
It can blossom into the most beautiful flower in the world.'
Curiosity flashed through your eyes,
'The most beautiful flower in the world? '
'Yes, people call that flower Future! '
Then I held your hands and planted the fantastic seed in the land.
The Truth then took root, sprouted, and had its first leaf.
You were so happy, you watered and fertilised it everyday.
You blocked the wind and kept the rain off
Just like this,
Together with the seed,
You went through the chilly spring, hot summer, desolate fall and piercingly cold winter.
When the last chill in the wind faded,
The seed of Truth had its first bud.
You were so excited that you could not sleep for nights.
Waiting aside for the flower to burst
Finally, on that unusual morning,
Butterflies dancing over the grass,
Birds singing on the branches,
The bud burst into a flower,
So beautiful and moving.
The splendour of Truth suddenly cast colourful lights upon the meadow.
You clapped your hands and shouted loudly,
'Hurry up and look, Gardener.
Our Truth has blossomed.
How beautiful is our Future! '
However, the Gardener had already left quietly, leaving the beautiful Future for you.
Later, the meadow became a garden, with beautiful flowers of Future all over.
You named the garden a pleasant name:
'Future Garden'
Will you still occasionally think of me, the gardener?
If so, just whisper my name.
I will definitely hear you.
I will quietly stand above the clouds,
And look at you with smile.
By a practitioner in China