Racism does not prevent one from marrying from the race they despise.
Racism is not one calling the other monkey or pig.
Racism is an entrenched political and financial system
That excludes other people on account of their race.
It is the system of the world that monopolizes wealth in the hands of one race
The tragedy we have today is leaders (personalities)are elevated way above ideas and ideals.
We must never die for a leader but for an idea and ideal we can
Christians today seem to shy away from critical thinking.
They will accept any philosophy packaged as scripture without questioning
The authenticity of the message.
We were given not fear but a sound mind
Church is never meant to make people happy but your faith in the redeemer Jesus does
I do not defend my Lord Jesus because He is more than able to defend me and fight His own battles,
Instead I defend my faith in Him.
Jesus was not born on the 25th of December.
It's a pagan day that was christened no wonder its beer orgies appeal more than its reverence.
To me it's just a public holiday that's all.
Law was designed to protect society from evil but evil usurped the ideal to entrench tyranny.
Fear when numbed turns to hate
The victim will never be factual and logical in explaining pain because pain is just painful.
The perpetrator will always come up with lots of academic and logical excuses
as to why they decided to be evil; much more when they still wield
economic, political and gun 'powder'
Deep fear brings forth hate
To outlaw an outlaw is unheard of.
How do you outlaw that which is already illegal by its mere existence?
The black market is a 'financial outlaw ‘market and I do not understand how it can be outlawed
Wherever you hear these terms know that only the elite are being referred to as the people: The People's parliament, the people's army, the people's government.
Never be fooled, no country that uses these phrases regards people's freedoms as important
We are too busy dealing and wheeling to even think how vulnerable we are as a people. Our social fabric has been torn to pieces by thugs who drive in fancy cars and live in mansions.
They have guns, they are untouchable and guess what they have become our youth's heroes.
we now have warlords running the mining sector
This not anything our lawyer politicians are cut out for
Evil is not racial. Evil is inherent in humanity in spite of race.
Evil is only accentuated by economic and subsequent political power.
All races are capable of being racist
What happened to "mandionerepi" whose paintings are all over the caves
In Chitungwiza, Domboshava and Banket?
East, Central and Southern Africa belongs to the Pigmies and khoisan people. I call them the first nations.
We, the bantu came and took their land leaving them crammed in the hot deserts
Politicians from time immemorial have always turned to popular religion for energy.
But this has always weakened them the more.
In the last days of Mugabe and Gbagbo church services where daily, nearly. I will not say more.
All great nations are never from pure breeds but assimilating conquered and weaker tribes
Capitalism is catastrophic if left unfettered
Pan Africanism is a phoney philosophy or ideology.
Like communism sounds very good on paper and in the classroom.
Power is in being honest that you have a weakness as a human being.
dictators don't feel comfortable with young dynamic opposition leaders that connect with the youth.
Anything you get for free you mostly likely not to value it
Any revolution led by political parties is temporary
I literally lived this history I am not reading it from some book
In a certain country bordering Wakanda patriotism is supporting the president at all cost.
It's unfortunate that we redefined theft to hustling as if it's something different.
Hustling simply means obtaining illicitly or by use of force.
At times doing good things and doing the right things are not the same.
Many leaders do good things for their own selfish ends.
To be inspired is good but to realise the inspiration to benefit the now and the future is another thing all together.
Our education is too exam centred rather than knowledge based.
Anyone can cram and memorise theories and pass but very few come out knowledgeable
Enough to make society better, very few indeed.
Education shouldn't be a fashion thing.
A thief that steals from a thief is a thief still.
PHILLIP NINE MAFUNGA
31 December 2019