Giving or not giving voice to the heretical words...
Understanding that the true love is a scarification.....
For being or not being....
True love inundating the conundrum
Like that sacred river of longing,
Sometimes flowing swiftly through landscapes
Astounding the lurid heart.....
The sound of silence passing...
Passions galvanizing the wounds and pain mares for enduring...
Trying to heal the injury...
Flying gulls beneath the lower bowl, touching the blue waters of the ocean.....
Waves and sad memories  dancing on the golden sand....
Shying away from the  horizon line....
Vessels  screaming and shouting their hearts out....
Swimming across the ocean of red burning coals,
Searching for that  golden threshold.....
The color spectrum giving the  necessary senses to the lights of absolution,
When their senses turn inward.....
Gazing the mountain from the window pane...
From the indoor side of that rain-rinsed windowpane.....
Sitting on that mountain and gazing at the stars....
Birds gliding across, like rainbow rising, spreading their wings, streaming..
Those birds flying in a variety of ways, ranging from gliding to soaring to flapping....
The crystalline steeping slopes of the mountain multi-faces....
Being decorated with climbing ropes, heavenly as seen from above....
And the crystalline waters, steeping cliffs, hidden lakes  and lush forests...
A sign of a divine love...
Understanding that love is like the Earth and the gravity,
Inseparable.....
Groans and moans leading to  mortuaries....
Life is like walking in the middle of the park,
Embracing the crouch air,
Or embracing change by resisting the defensive crouch.....
And going deep into the human system, feeling like being born again....
The smile on the face painting an episode of the past,
Engraving our hearts with golden debris,
Like a golden pyramid, contracting pyramid.....
Generating our consciousness  and chasing away insanity....
Sounds of silence passing...
Being like a  blue ocean...
Dedicated  to Sulaiman Mohd Yusof