2)  In animal durbar aliens' teeter-tottering on dandle board in the middle sat some rats and jumping cats unsure of anything tried to jump in both ways but the result is they stayed at the same in the theatre of absurd, really buffoons! Abracadabra!  Politico-clowns wore psycho gowns in their hands, magic wands ready to offer some sops to the both dwellers of pandemonium and harmonium: Sponsoring free tickets to all galaxies with a bonus ambrosia, lifetime guarantee - arrangements meeting with aliens, robot slaves, free WiFi www connections even in hamlets,1 kg gold, to kids, some toys: cycles, cars, elephants, sickle, fans, etc. Special offers to little boys teddy bears with hands; to little girls supplying lotus flowers 24/7 are only few to name: Mania, mania, election mania election shouted modern soothsayers in hallucination.
Fisherman bought fishing net, put some bait to catch a fish sang fisher man waving his hands to his sweethearts; oh sorry they are just his voters. Holy-moly In the animal durbar, playing chess teeter-tottered aliens on the dandle board, in the middle meddled so dumping rats and jumping cats on either side but unsure of anything jumped in both ways but the result is stayed at the same place in the theatre of absurd, oh real buffoons!
Rattrap peddler, just a meddler bought a trap, added some cheese crop and dropped to trap some special rats: "on my shirt, on my sleeves, in my pockets and in my collar are my lovers, only just lotus flowers, April fool in the election school! Abracadabra!  Politico-clowns wore psycho gowns in their hands, magic wands ready to offer some sops to the both dwellers of pandemonium and harmonium: Sponsoring free tickets to all galaxies with a bonus ambrosia, lifetime guarantee - arrangements meeting with aliens, robot slaves, free WiFi www connections even in hamlets and 1 kg gold -
to kids, some toys: cycles, cars, elephants, sickle, fans, etc. Special offers to little boys teddy bears with 3 hands; to little girls supplying lotus flowers 24/7 are only few to name - sang Holly hock, holy cow, holy man, holy you and holy me and chanted modern soothsayers in hallucination: Mania, mania, election mania election!