Blizzards, wildfires, Tsunamis and hurricanes caused no trauma
Nor earthquakes & erupted volcanoes did any catostopic drama
Bam, boom, bang, humanbomb blasted in a jungle causing death
With shuddering, trembling & tearing as a misery struck
Horrible horror, terrible terror, mass violence spread, yuck!
Unleashing death, havoc, riots, & unrest in the absolute mayhem
Amphigory, focus-refocus-defocus on the animal farm: an allegory!
Mountains of debris, seas of smoke, dust & rust burst over them
The harmless animals - ducks, chicks, goats're perplexed, o man!
Running, rushing, shouting, yelling, and fainting, they began
Watching at the heap of torn bodies, they forgot to take breath
Wars, massacres, and all forms of evil activities took place
Bullies, rowdies, ruffians, and hooligans ruled without grace
Amphigory, focus-refocus-defocus on the animal farm: an allegory!
Committed crimes, passed the buck on others with an attack
Mistreating, abusing, plotting made them hard nuts to crack
Conflicts on complex matters divided animals into entangled boughs
Corruption, injustice, rottenness and bloodshed are common shows
Virtues buried down in the sea and vices rose up to the sky
Barbarism and terrorism inflicted on them, oh it's not a lie
The poor animals lost peace & morals that ruled for centuries
All are caught in chains of iron rules enforced by all countries.
Amphigory, focus-refocus-defocus on the animal farm; an allegory!
Ferocious animals ran roughshod with bioweapons in Dragon-woods
Chancing to pounce on the lesser animals of neighboring woods
With veto power: Animalia, pigs violated rules in the pigtatorship
nursing venom in their bosom, commited monstrous harms with a whip
They know how to cook goose, take booze, kick those everywhere
And when and how to cast invisible nets to catch fish with a snare.
Amphigory, focus-refocus-defocus on the animal farm: an allegory!
Two small goats were quarreling in another animal farm for toys
Some hyenas of powerful forest rushed to spot rising noise
For their howling at high pitch, bleating became unheard song mime
Bovines, bisons, hippos & rhinos joined the feast with a cruel rhyme
Sheep, cattle, cat, deer & hare with tears ran out of the farm
Mass struggles, class clashes, dreadful ruckus ruled in the same farm
Amphigory, focus-refocus-defocus on the animal farm: an allegory!
With the sudden demise of Napoleon: the pigtator, beasts cheered
Camels, zebras, dogs, monkeys, donkeys & ordinary ones reappeared
In ensuing battle for power, brutal lions emerged victorious
Shared power with wild boars, bears, chetahs & foxes atrocious
By defeating all farms, the bestial rules: animalia, are imposed
Ration's cut, spirit is crushed and to danger, beasts are exposed.
Amphigory, focus-refocus-defocus on the animal farm: an allegory!