I make my way, through the heavily treed,
leaf covered path, I suddenly see you.
You're standing there, surrounded by wild flowers.
Behind you, a small stream, trembles it's way down
the mountainside. You are so radiantly beautiful,
I overflow, ache with love for you. No words are
spoken. I find myself bursting, for want of your love.
For the need to hold you...touch you.
Slowly, we make our way toward each other.
We meet amid a bed of soft, green moss.
Our hands reach out, touch, and as if in
slow motion, we find ourselves seated
on this bed of Gods making. Your lips
are moist, my heart pounding. Your breath
quickens, as the rise and fall of your full
breasts seem to try to free themselves.
I'm am inches from those lips, I have long
for. As you move toward me, we kiss.
A long, moist, tender... hungry kiss.
A kiss, that fulfills all the promises of
love. I feel myself, melting into your very soul.
I lay you gently back on the bed of green.
You, touching the pulsating volcano
beneath my pants. I unbutton your blouse,
and free you from the thin veiled garment,
that had covered your hardened nipples.
For a brief moment, I stare at you.
Your breasts, moist with desire and your
eyes fill with love and the promise of ecstasy.
I tremble, as if a magnet, the brown circles of
desire, atop your milky white breasts, draw my lips,
to softly encircle your erect nipples.Your hands slide
behind my head, and crush my lips to your softness.
You rip open my pants, clutching the hard roundness, of
my throbbing flesh. I touch you in your most private part
and it is wet...wanting. We clutch, grab, explore
each other, like two wild animals. You open yourself
to me, and murmur, 'Now...now...please now.'
I can wait no longer, as my missile of love,
on the verge of exploding, seeks the inviting wetness,
between your legs. I can barely contain myself, then....
The phone rings. No! No! Not now!
It keeps ringing...ringing...ringing!
Keeper of dreams, I beg you...not now!
Please...not now.
The vision evaporates! I try to recapture
it. The phone, now sounding like an
alarm, persists. I have lost the dream.
I have lost...her.
Dammit! I curse the reality of the moment!
She knows, as do I, I will go to her again.
I can not give her up. For she has become
me...and I her.
Until tomorrow...or another day...or another
time...or another world.
It matters not where she is. I shall find her.
For she is my love...and I shall yet again,
go to her.
© Joe Fazio