Memorial Day weekend, ESPN, I watched, “Outside The Lines, ”
And what I heard, well as the saying goes it just, “blew my mind, ”
High school kids desiring to advance & arrive at the college level,
However, there are those coaches who would bury it with a shovel.
7-on-7 football program is rapidly gaining popularity nationwide,
Okay now begs the question, what right has the NCAA to decide?
Former NFL great, Keyshawn Johnson sponsors & coaches teens,
By the way he doesn’t make any money but spends his own green.
How is it that people are in a huff about a day spent on a yacht?
To reward the kids for their efforts and enjoy what they have not?
Giving a sneak peak at what can be accomplished and the reward,
Should they reach the pinnacle of success and are able to afford.
Two Caucasian coaches speaking on OTL were one 100% against,
And should be obvious they grew up on the other side of the fence,
Whereas the majority of these teens are of African American decent,
Now with the high unemployment rate parents are just making rent.
How dare they or anybody come on camera, whine, moan & groan,
Because most of these kids will never qualify for any student loans,
Until they or anyone are willing to foot the bill, leave them alone,
Prejudice is not manifested in the locker room it begins at home.
Scholarships are the one and only way they will ever continue on,
How can any sanctioning body not involved declare it is wrong?
When a former standout wide receiver is willing to share his time,
What gives those who’ve never played a right to speak their mind?
It’s impossible to appreciate endless opportunities unless exposed,
As inner city Blacks, Hispanics & Whites the whole world knows,
Are like goldfish in their limited environment of one gallon bowls,
Till the big fish on the outside take time to tutor & help them grow.
So, when coaches steer them towards colleges they graduated from,
Would that not be better than not being recruited from a single one?
Or a school with unscrupulous characteristics and deceitful means?
No one alive has the right to prematurely squash God given dreams.