The 2018 FIFA World Cup in Russia was a terrific event.
Thirty two teams came together to celebrate sportsmanship,
Of course, there were a few tackles, yellow and red cards. Ships,
Planes and busses full of fans, (I am kidding) , came under the tent
Of brotherhood to compete under the flag of their respective country.
Gotcha! Check the statistics to find out how many countries have competed.
I'm not going to do your assignment for you tonight. The fans were elated,
When there was a goal, even though the penalty shootouts weren't funny;
Especially, when your team got lost. The big headlines were Mexico beat Germany,
On the first round. Italy and the USA did not qualify. Brazil got beat by Belgium.
Argentina, Spain, Senegal, Japan and many others got lost.Bring the beer, the rum,
The wine and the pretzels to celebrate. At the end, there were four countries left to play
In the stadium. In the finals, France beat Belgium, and England was defeated by Croatia.
For a month, we watched and enjoyed great football matches. Almost every day,
I was stationed at my television. That was a nice party, a wonderful gala.
I will never forget the best World Cup ever. Oh! I missed seeing Pele, the greatest
Football player ever, who is now seventy seven years old. That was the best
Time to be alive. The final game was on a Sunday; Croatia got beat by France.
The score was four goals against two goals. Vive la France! Vive la difference!
The players from both teams received medals, which were handed out by Putin,
The President of Russia and other dignitaries. The P.M. of Croatia, a gorgeous woman,
And Macron, the French President greeted the players and the coaching staff.
There was jubilation. Everybody had a great time. We had fun and we laughed.
That was the best football/soccer competition ever.
Hopefully, the Qatar World Cup, in 2022, will be better.
Copyright © July 15,2018, Hébert Logerie, All rights reserved
Hébert Logerie is the author of several collections of poems.