Pastor in the pulpit, the Sanctuary, supposedly holier than thou,
Preachers wife is gunned down in cold blood, Ka-boom, Ka-pow,
Reverend’s son, a prior relationship, shoots step mom in the head,
Three on trial for murder might be more than the one already dead.
A love triangle and as any third grader can enlighten you in math,
Different kinds of geometrical shapes & they cannot be cut in half,
And yet this situation has added one so now it‘s more than plenty,
Tracy Bernard Burleson 46, at the time William Darnell Fuller 20.
Shared the same sexual encounter, Tyonne Marie Palmer-Pollard,
Here a lie there lie the trial’s underway, as all three were collard,
Tracy claims he & the Mrs. had an argument, he left to get chips,
There were no snacks but pastor said it already through his lips.
But that particular store closed before he got there which was at 10,
Maybe it was his guardian angle who picked the lock and let him in,
Okay, but what about the honey bee who was active with both men?
As Pauletta Burleson’s shot execution-style courtroom drama begins.
Main reason for the death via lead poisoning was her insurance money,
By the way, the church suspiciously burned down now isn’t that funny,
Case of he said, she said is there evidence enough for a jury to believe?
Who was the mastermind, who were the innocent one’s being deceived.
First New Mount Calvary Baptist Church, Huston’s 5th Ward, all is fine,
Week between its destruction and her death hey, it happens all the time,
It has been over a year and still no charges of yet in that devastating fire,
Bring out the charcoal, someone’s going to burn in this murder for hire.
Lust overtaking the anointed is nothing new remember Jimmy Swaggart?
Jim Baker gave her hush money while a man brought down Ted Haggard,
Rabbi Fred Neulander guilty paying two men to carry out a hit on his wife,
Incarcerated in Trenton, New Jersey, serving a prison term 30 years to life.
House of worship, communion, choirs, Praise God, what went wrong?
Was murder even necessary, settle out of court ok, just ask Eddie Long,
Ah, but this was no, “mega-church” times are hard and money was tight,
Therefore the one and only solution was homicide thru deception, right?