The good Lords commandments have been cast to the side,
If you commit murder there's no need to hide,
We no longer heed the words of our God,
With self-interest society has become overawed.
Material goods are more important than health,
Regardless of how you obtain that wealth,
Stealing by force is now classed as routine,
Our society is in the worst state it's ever been.
All religions dictate, thou shalt not kill,
It's a commandment we humans can't seem to fulfill,
Of killings there's always an endless supply,
We've an insatiable appetite to watch others die.
Be it in wars or through mindless disputes,
Violence towards others is what it recruits,
If someone's being killed we just stop and stare,
Fact is nowadays we no longer care.
We see it daily while watching the news,
It's a crime that some lawyers try to excuse,
We no longer see murder as a heinous act,
It's looked on as minor that is a sad fact.
Violence towards others is a daily routine,
We will turn away to avoid being seen,
If you don't enjoy violence you are way out of tune,
From murder and mayhem we've become immune.
From an early age we learn all about death,
How to make someone take that final breath,
From computer games to movies of hate,
Our thirst for killing we find hard to abate.
We're taught that it's wrong but we don't seem to hear,
The destruction of others we no longer fear,
We look upon murder as a way of life,
It doesn't bother us it be it with gun or a knife.
There's no deterrent to killing another,
Conscience nowadays is so easy to smother,
A luxury prison will be your reward,
What happened to living and dying by the sword?
A few years in jail and soon you'll be free,
That's not a punishment I'm sure you'd agree?
Killing for fun is now classed as the norm,
Then the victims are told you need to reform.
While they and their families find it hard to live on,
The perpetrators complain they feel put upon,
By pandering to murderers we encourage their crimes,
Laughing at killing is a sign of the times.
Unless we change now our society will fail,
We'll no longer bother putting murderers in jail,
The decent will be scared just to be alive,
Lawlessness and anarchy are what we'll see thrive.
If you're honest you'll be classed as totally insane,
Then cast to the side if you dare to complain,
Society as we know it will no longer exist,
The good among us will no longer be missed.
It's to future generations this legacy we endow,
Killing others means nothing, it's happening now,
If you think it's okay then you're totally dense,
‘' For The Crime Of Murder There Is No Defence ‘'