A salute and a smile with a simple look
Along with a hello, subtle and by the book
A sweet eloquence to regale my dole
With a soft voice to emblazon my soul
Surely it was a perceptive greeting
Along with our best and last meeting
The Constituent's Prayer
May all that so gallantly gait forward, no matter where they hail from on this hallowed but dainty path, be not dashed with the balky trials that precede calamity and walk abreast balderdash and gab
For sometimes these things emanate a facade of eloquence and can relentlessly vie to emaciate and ebb away spiritual integrity
And still there is a gargantuan task of darning those who have already been bamboozled and debauched by those things, which may even seem to be affluent
For even those things which stand as an edifice, can sometimes obfuscate the heart and mind
Although many have slipped away, out of our grasp into the abyss, their convictions were neither banal nor facile.
Therefore let us be as zealous in trying to guide them back upon the path of prudence and virtue.
We are convinced that our ideology of Peace love and God is judicious, therefore we pray that our strength is more than effectual as we jut forth along with the wisdom we have attained in this world
We embalm the philosophy of Peace love and God without negligence to anyone, and seek the lavishness of our Lord's word; wisdom, knowledge and understanding into every facet of our life, along with the eloquent virtues that we cling to in the immense of martyrdom.
Therefore we vie against spiritual vapidness, with faith as our totem, like a tinge of light from a quasi-stellar projectile, which gales into infinity.
We stand here because God had painted our history with small and great tableaus of resurrections.
Our quorum zealously seeks patience along with our rabid quest to discern between answers juxtaposed the opaque and even those, which are clearly put before us, which can sometimes lead us into the abyss.
But even on laden days, when our conscience is more acquiescent because of an inclined itinerary, we must realize that answers are here also;
Not just in immaculate victories told on happier days.
Ratification of the truth that there is much that we cannot resolve until we have our work done, is sanctioned and canonized by this senate, and will also obviate the trauntness of our hearts.
In times of a more variant ambiance, when dilemmas, for an hour, tries to come and debauched the soul with a sardonic temperament and perspective, let us stand proud abreast virtue, like the equestrian does beside the faithful stead, in the hippodrome, at their greatest hour
Then let it be virtue that the heart cohabits with, so when it is moved, it shall move with us.  Hallelujah.
This day, we shall commute a life of pious indignation, to fuel a perpetual quest, for that one night when we were saved, 'by the hand that delivered Isaac from his father'.