Mary's Song
There are people that you meet, and most of the time, especially when you don't think that they notice that you are watching them, when they are not looking directly at you, and of course this is what happened; as I have seen her frequently; having talked to her occasionally, and enjoyed seeing her; and I can only say this in retrospection, that she makes me smile inside; and as I continue I'll eventually, though prudently reveal why. One, a person whom you could enjoy looking at as much as talking to, which as I said, I had a chance to do both, and again, only being able to say this in retrospect, was after sitting down on the couch and having a meaningful dialogue with this young lady that will, as much she did myself, enlighten as well as entertain you.
Now she only wears high-heel shoes, forgive me if I'm not an expert on women's fashion, but they are sort of like the open thongs; on the back, sensuously exposing the pink soft flesh of the feet, but where these are, I'm sure the latest in design, also adds several inches to her height; at least two or three easily, but dramatically enough, you wouldn't truly notice it, because she has, forgive me if not intentional, an amusing strut; she does more than just walks, and she waves at me all of the time, so I know, she discretely sees me imbibing her persona, and allowing it to tantalize, I guess I can say, many parts of the senses, and discretely manifesting and uncontrollable yet infatuated and returned glance.
When Mary told me that she was from Iran, I was even more fervidly moved, for many reasons; it brought up a lot of issues; most of them in the news on a daily basis, from religious issues to nuclear proliferation, and I had recently read a really enlightening article on Iran and the issues it brought up as being a global player in today's world, and I recently went back and read once more where the author commented on these events, saying...
'…At one end of the spectrum are the hardest of the hard-liners, who disparage economic and diplomatic considerations and put Iran's security concerns ahead of all others.  At the opposite end are pragmatists, who believe that fixing Iran's failing economy must trump all else if the clerical regime is to retain power over the long term.  In between these camps waver many of Iran's most important power brokers, who would prefer not to have to choose between bombs and butter'.
This split provides an opportunity for the United States, and it's allies in Europe and Asia, to forge a new strategy to derail Iran's drive for nuclear weapons.  The West should use its economic clout to strengthen the hand of Iranian pragmatists, who could then argue for slowing, limiting, or shelving Tehran's nuclear program in return for the trade, aid, and investment that Iran badly needs.  Only if the mullahs recognize that they have a stark choice -they can have nuclear weapons or a healthy economy, but not both-might they give up their nuclear dreams.  With concern over Iran's nuclear aspirations growing, the United States and its allies now have a chance to present Iran with just such an ultimatum.
In an interview in 2002, the pragmatic minister of defense, Ali Shamkhani, warned that the 'existence of nuclear weapons will turn us into a threat to others that could be exploited in a dangerous way to harm our relations with the countries of the region.  The economic dimension of nuclear diplomacy is also pushing the pragmatists of multilateral sanctions.  'If there [are] domestic and foreign conflicts, foreign capital will not flow into the country, ' Rafsanjani has warned.  'In fact, such conflicts will lead to the flight of capital from this country.  On one course, Iran would agree to give up its nuclear program, accept a comprehensive inspection regime, and end its support for terrorism.  In exchange, the United States would lift sanctions and settle Iran's claims over the assets of Shah Mohammed Rezza Pahlave.  The West would also consider bringing Iran into international economic organizations such as the World Trade Organization, granting Iran increased commercial ties, and perhaps even providing it with economic assistance.  Western nations could sweeten the deal by agreeing or assisting Iran with its energy needs (the ostensible reason for its nuclear research programs)   and to forswear direct military attack.  The United States could also help create a new security architecture in the Persian Gulf in which Iranians, Arabs, and Americans would find cooperative ways to address their security concerns, much as Washington did with the Russians in Europe during the 1970s and the 1980s.  If, on the other hand, Iran decided to stay its current course, U.S. allies would join Washington in imposing precisely the sort of sanctions the mullahs fear would scuttle Iran's precarious economy.  These sanctions could take the form of everything from barring investment in specific projects or entire sectors (such as the oil industry)   to severing all commercial contacts with Iran if it proved utterly unwilling to address Western demands…Spelling out in advance all of the steps Tehran is expected to take or to avoid, as well as the specific rewards and punishments they would incur, is the best way to prevent Iran and U.S. allies from reneging on their commitments as they have in the past…Because Iran's economic woes have been a major factor in popular discontent with the regime, there is good reason to believe that, if forced to make such a choice, Tehran would grudgingly opt to save its economy and look for other ways to deal with its security and foreign policy aspirations.
But I'm also enlightened from a cultural perspective; a sociological one, humanitarian, and add all of the above together, it only means that I love meeting people from different countries, cultures, places, and I could spend the rest of my days traveling just to do this, and thus we were in an intimate position, where I was in arms reach of her, and the conversation we are now having, allowed me to express a warm gesture of pleasure of hearing it by putting my hands on both sides of her temples and giving her a small but passionate kiss, as if even something inside of me suddenly, and passionately moved also.
Maybe it was its (Iran's)   culture that I had heard about from the days in grade school, ancient and current, certainly it was because she was a beautiful young woman; twenty-five; only to complement myself; she could have been even much younger, and thus again, by all of the above reasons, adding to the unexpected surprise that was warmly met by her, excepted, and returned with a soft kiss of her own.  And all of the above, by now, for you, along with being fashionably dressed, and with beautifully styled and kempt hair, I have created a masterpiece, not of the Mona Lisa, but of a beautiful and lovely young lady; Mary.
All of this, of course has to be followed by, for the appetizer, was her strut, it invited me in, and thus, main course allowed me to hold her in my arms; followed by dessert, which came in seeing her take off, along with light outer garment, the caricature of an even more soft and lovely person, as she sat back to relax on the couch and allow me to attempt to entertain her for the evening.  For above light garment, there lay the façade of a very, though cordial, and yet complimented with a smile, tough-girl persona, or should I say dilemma; for until, after habiliments lay on the couch,  there was the woman that possessed Mary, and I could not help but wonder how could such a delicate creature be the one in control.  So you can see me sitting there seeing her walk from one end of the room to the other on a few occasions, and each time I refused to pass up the opportunity to reconfirm what I was witnessing; hair that flowed down to sensuously curved shoulders, where it was just long enough to give way to an even more delicate back that touched perfectly round hips, and by the time that I did go from the back of her thighs to her feet, as she stood there; the absence of the stylishly fashionable shoes, and along with it, also the absence of the two to three inches that were also bought at that time, which I still cannot wonder why, for its absence did make the perfect woman, while I sat on the couch staring, yet hoping that I could consume as much as possible before having her turn around and wonder had I yet satisfied myself without her permission.
Moments later, as we set back on the couch continuing a conversation that would allow us to talk about many different aspects of life, yet, it did rang from an intimate strata; work to raising a family, frequenting home, Iran and back to Dubai; children and family, and like the virtuoso, that persona only relaxed at the tune of the nights cadence.  She had a ring that she kept playing with on her finger, more than just subconscious playing with, and thus after immediately noticing it, like her strut, catching me between pleasure and interest, I, not to think to quietly or too loudly, slowly had taken it out of her hand, held it between fingertips for a few seconds, and told her that this would be our occupation for the rest of our lives, when she quietly asked did I think it was possible; the questions having many avenues, yet it had me now trying to remember the words, as I found myself saying, with this ring I do wed to be my wife for the rest of my life, which she mutually allowed and condoned before sitting down and continuing our conversation into a nice Dubai summer‘s night.