The Parents Prayer II
There are few things that I could tell the wise,
When there are many wonders that are still a surprise.
Most from church, school, and working all of my life,
Some from family, friends; some strife.
But we are here because you still believe in
The things that keep us all away from sin.
It's okay that not all of our dreams come true
When we realize that there is so much left to do.
We don't get paid for how hard we try,
It's left to our children so they learn to fly
But trying to be good takes away most of our troubles,
It calms our minds and the good it doubles.
You can be glad today that you live here in America
Because of the many gifts that you've created, starting with
Barbara.
This life still allows you to grow and have fun;
Much of it with the one you named
Clinton Jr.
The wiser you become, the more you will see
How some of your dreams came true through
Brenda Lee.
The best gift that I got from you was wisdom,
I put it all together and called it
Otradom.
The day has overcome the dark
And given you the youngest one, Gary Mark.
Trust has also been given to you,
Since someone like Niya
Trust you based on virtue.
Friendship is one of those things
That doesn't have to end, so Diane,
I'm sure, will always be a friend.
You grow and share when you know someone
with an empathetic view, someone like Sibil
Who cares and admires you.
The name grandparents should also mean congratulation
For because of you, we welcome another generation.
We are glad for what you have given you grandson,
The one who's grown up beautifully; Solomon
The next one, it will also be dreams and promises he delivers,
The one called Joshua Thomas or Rivers.
We were all as happy as you were that blessed day
When the Heaven's kept it's promise and delivered Desiree.
We hope that they will all grow up and win
And dreams and goals are reached by you grandson Kevin.
We are sure you love them from the youngest to the senior,
Especially the 'Capt.'; Gary Junior
We know that with God all things are possible
And were reassured of that with the arrival of Miracle.
There are many things to proud of like health, happiness and America. Family, prosperity, love and Charisma
Like Nya, Maya, Aliyah, Gary and Kevin
We pray that life is as gracious and giving with Jaylin
Although they were born on different days,
Being fortunate enough to be blessed first with Maya,
We gave as much as we could, hoping it all stays
And because of that God then blessed us with Aliyah
Because strangers will also determine a part of their lives,
We pray they respect those like
Frank, Jerry and their wives.
This will all help us to progress and stay one
And remember the ones called
Hilda and Clinton (Sr.) .
Because only half of our life is material,
Look also in the half that is most spiritual.
There are many things that children will learn
From the small to the great;
The truth about God, love, life
When and when not to debate.
And for every creature that fly, swims and crawls
With us from day to day,
So that you will never forget them,
They are also called GoPe (God's People)