It's long since I stopped believing in human wisdom.
Long since I stopped distinguishing wisdom of the old - and
Stupidity of the new generation
It's un-intelligible to know what the new generation does differently
Within the organismic experiences of life
-But isn't this the problem!
Or is it that the older generation have become the epitome of every evil?
As youths make no decisive legislation
On climate change
War
Waste disposal
Gender equality
Racism
Human trafficking
Migration
Marriage
political repression!
The wisdom of the older generation have always reigned!
But nothing has changed
Many like them drown in the seas,
cold and terrified
to find solutions
The same prematurely die on wetness of their blood in the streets with unwanted wounds. Or stupor
I have seen the older-generation diving us into black-holes
Of despicable practices in the name of patriotism, religion and color
All seemingly wiser
and all-knowing
Although our conspicuousness rightly haunts us
As beneath it all, we know the truth - and it's all on greed
It's demonic nature is encapsulated in the tongues of decency
and diplomacy - or sometimes - political correctness!
It's all in the appetite for repressive power
-But isn't this the problem
Or should we just believe because they've said, we're the future
While we're soothingly killing this uncertain future - who knows?
- But isn't that the problem?
Or is it that the youth have lost their ways?
The youths!
They've hardly known what they need!
Hardly in control of themselves - most of them are rabid
Retracting not from the facade path of the older generation
Instead they as their mothers, have become custodians of
Hatred
Arrogance
Drunkenness
Confusion
Ungodliness like their lost fathers
The spring of all evils!
-But isn't that the problem?
That we've become drawn into darkness
As we resent the light?
That we question every simplicity of life
Preferring to align with its complexities
- making life unknown
Creating a world Where truth and facts, lies and slanders
simply switch places
As all we need is who says them and how they say them to us.
Where we believe our realities are different and indistinguishable to
- Darkness and Light
- But isn't this the problem?
Or is it the choices we make
- and
What and Who we are taught
To love
To hate
To despise
To assist
And religion - But not God - to be loyal to?