Koala climbed old Ironbark to address the assembled animals,
“Friends, we have two contestants. Buffalo you’re first.”
Buffalo trotted forward, carefully avoiding tails and toes.
His soulful tone calmed the fidgety crowd.
THE MINOTAUR AND THE MUSEUM GUARD
“I’ve come to see the Grecian pots.”
“Go away.”
“I can’t come in you say. Why not?
I’ve come to see the Grecian pots.”
“They’re china you clot.”
“I’ve fought and died on countless urns, yet never broken clay;
I’ve come to see the Grecian pots.”
“Go away.”
“How unjust”, said Kangaroo tearfully.
Buffalo nodded appreciatively, “Bulls can be trusted
in china shops. Mythbusters proved it on Discovery.”
“Thank you Buffalo, ” said Koala. “Dingo, please read your triolet.”
Dingo padded to the front. His canine smile compelled attention.
OH WHAT A BEAUTIFUL BILLABONG
Ferals should be shot.
Buffaloes are feral.
Beastly billabong blots;
Ferals should be shot.
Our watery spot’s somewhat
at peril.
Ferals should be shot.
Buffaloes are feral.
“Dingo’s triolet is offensive, ” said Kangaroo
“True, but great literature should shock us from complacency
and challenge our preconceptions, ” said Goanna.
“Dingo’s triolet is great, ” said Kangaroo.
“It’s most unfair, I’m third generation, ” protested Buffalo.
“I’m sure Dingo did not intend a literal interpretation…..”
“Yes I did, ” said Dingo.
“……because if so, we’d have to ban it, ” said Goanna.
“No I didn’t, ” said Dingo.
“You’re feral too Dingo, ” said Buffalo huffily. “Your ancestors
arrived with sea-faring Asian traders about 5000 years ago.
“That’s a mooot point, ” sneered Dingo.
“I vote for Dingo, ” said Kangaroo.
“Wait, we have a late entry, ” said Koala.
“Whose is it”?
“Mine. It’s called….er…..”
I’M A BONA FIDE GONDWANALAND AUSSIE
Alas you’re both disqualified
and now it’s time to vote.
Never mind, at least you tried;
alas you’re both disqualified.
No triolets remain beside
this one I wrote.
Alas you’re both disqualified
and now it’s time to vote.
The animals became increasingly….
ANIMATED
“I vote for Kangaroo, ” said Kangaroo.
“Unprecedented since you haven’t entered, ” said Goanna.
Koala snickered, “That’d be a coup.”
“I vote for Kangaroo, ” said Kangaroo.
Buffalo and Dingo, both ‘true blue’
skirmished in a patriotic manner.
“I vote for Kangaroo, ” said Kangaroo.
“Unprecedented, avant-garde, a winner! ” said Goanna.